#The text from several motivational books. I do not have the rights to any of this data and would be happy to take it down at any request.

The Power Of Now
Eckhart Tolle
A Guide to Spiritual Enlightenment

PUBLISHER'S PREFACE
BY MARC ALLEN
Author of Visionary Business and A Visionary Life

Perhaps once in a decade, or even once in a generation, a book like The Power of Now comes
along. It is more than a book; there is a living energy in it, one you can probably feel as you
hold it. It has the power to create an experience in readers, and change their lives for the
better.
The Power of Now was first published in Canada, and the Canadian publisher, Connie
Kellough, told me she heard repeated stories of positive changes and even miracles that have
happened once people got into the book. "Readers call in," she said. "And so many of them
tell me of the wonderful healings, transformations, and increased joy they are experiencing
because they have embraced this book."
The book makes me aware that every moment of my life is a miracle. This is absolutely
true, whether I realize it or not. And The Power of Now, over and over, shows me how to realize
it.
From the first page of his writing, it is clear that Eckhart Tolle is a contemporary master.
He is not aligned with any particular religion or doctrine or guru; his teaching embraces the
heart, the essence, of all other traditions, and contradicts none of them - Christian, Hindu,
Buddhist, Muslim, indigenous, or anything else. He is able to do what all the great masters
have done: to show us, in simple and clear language, that the way, the truth, and the light is
within us.
Eckhart Tolle begins by briefly introducing us to his story - a story of early depression
and despair that culminated in a tremendous experience of awakening one night not long after
his twenty-ninth birthday. For the past twenty years, he has reflected on that experience,
meditated, and deepened his understanding.
In the last decade, he has become a world-class teacher, a great soul with a great message,
one that Christ taught, one that Buddha taught: a state of enlightenment is attainable, here and
now. It is possible to live free of suffering, free of anxiety and neurosis. To do this, we have
to come to understand our role as the creator of our pain; our own mind causes our problems,
not other people, not "the world out there." It is our own mind, with its nearly constant stream
of thoughts, thinking about the past, worrying about the future. We make the great mistake of
identifying with our mind, thinking that's who we are - when, in fact, we are far greater
beings.
Over and over, Eckhart Tolle shows us how to connect with what he calls our Being:
Being is the eternal, ever-present One Life beyond the myriad forms of life that
are subject to birth and death. However, Being is not only beyond but also deep
within every form as its innermost invisible and indestructible essence. This means
that it is accessible to you now as your own deepest self, your true nature. But don't
seek to grasp it with your mind. Don't try to understand it. You can know it only when
the mind is still, when you are present, fully and intensely in the Now.... To regain
awareness of Being and to abide in that state of `feeling-realization' is enlightenment.
The Power of Now is nearly impossible to read straight through - it requires you to put it
down periodically and reflect on the words and apply them to your own life experience. It is a
complete guide, a complete course, in meditation and realization. It is a book to be revisited
again and again - and each time you revisit it, you gain new depth and meaning. It is a book
that many people, including me, will want to study for a lifetime.
The Power of Now has a growing number of devoted readers. It has already been called a
masterpiece; whatever it is called, however it is described, it is a book with the power to
change lives, the power to awaken us to fully realize who we are.
Marc Allen
Novato, California U.S.A.
August 1999

FOREWORD
BY RUSSELL E. DICARLO
Author of Towards a New World View

Blanketed by an azure sky, the orange-yellow rays of the setting sun can, at special times, gift
us with a moment of such considerable beauty, we find ourselves momentarily stunned, with
frozen gaze. The splendor of the moment so dazzles us, our compulsively chattering minds
give pause, so as not to mentally whisk us away to a place other than the here-and-now.
Bathed in luminescence, a door seems to open to another reality, always present, yet rarely
witnessed.
Abraham Maslow called these "peak experiences," since they represent the high moments
of life where we joyfully find ourselves catapulted beyond the confines of the mundane and
ordinary. He might just as well have called them "peek" experiences. During these expansive
occasions, we sneak a glimpse of the eternal realm of Being itself. If only for a brief moment
in time, we come home to our True Self.
"Ah," one might sigh, "so grand... if only I could stay here. But how do I take up
permanent residence?"
During the past ten years, I have committed myself to finding out. During my search, I
have been honored to engage in dialogue with some of the most daring, inspiring and
insightful "paradigm pioneers" of our time: in medicine, science, psychology, business,
religion/spirituality, and human potential. This diverse group of individuals is joined by their
commonly voiced insight that humanity is now taking a quantum leap forward in its
evolutionary development. This change is accompanied by a shift in world view – the basic
picture we carry with us of "the way things are." A world view seeks to answer two
fundamental questions, "Who are we?" and "What is the nature of the Universe in which we
live?" Our answers to these questions dictate the quality and characteristics of our personal
relationships with family, friends and employers/employees. When considered on a larger
scale, they define societies.
It should be of little surprise that the world view which is emerging calls into question
many of the things Western society holds to be true:
MYTH #1 Humanity has reached the pinnacle of its development.

Esalen co-founder Michael Murphy, drawing upon comparative religious studies, medical
science, anthropology, and sports, has made a provocative case that there are more advanced
stages of human development. As a person reaches these advanced levels of spiritual
maturity, extraordinary capacities begin to blossom - of love, vitality, personhood, bodily
awareness, intuition, perception, communication, and volition.
First step: to recognize they exist. Most people do not. Then, methods can be employed
with conscious intention.
MYTH #2 We are completely separate from each other, nature, and the Kosmos.

This myth of "other-than-me" has been responsible for wars, the rape of the planet, and all
forms and expressions of human injustice. After all, who in their right mind would harm
another if they experienced that person as part of themselves? Stan Grof, in his research of
nonordinary states of consciousness, summarizes by saying "the psyche and consciousness of
each of us is, in the last analysis, commensurate with "All-That-Is" because there are no
absolute boundaries between the body/ego and the totality of existence."
Dr. Larry Dossey's Era-3 medicine, where the thoughts, attitudes, and healing
intentions of one individual can influence the physiology of another person (in contrast to
Era-2, prevailing mind-body medicine) is very well supported by scientific studies into the
healing power of prayer. Now this can’t happen according to the known principles of physics
and world view of traditional science. Yet the preponderance of evidence suggests that indeed
it does.
MYTH #3 The physical world is all there is.

Materialistically bound, traditional science assumes that anything that cannot be measured,
tested in a laboratory, or probed by the five senses or their technological extensions simply
doesn't exist. Its "not real." The consequence: all of reality has been collapsed into physical
reality. Spiritual, or what I would call nonphysical, dimensions of reality have been run out of
town.
This clashes with the "perennial philosophy," that philosophical consensus spanning ages,
religions, traditions, and cultures, which describes different but continuous dimensions of
reality. These run from the most dense and least conscious - what we'd call "matter" - to the
least dense and most conscious, which we'd call spiritual.
Interestingly enough, this extended, multidimensional model of reality is suggested by
quantum theorists such as Jack Scarfetti who describes superluminal travel. Other dimensions
of reality are used to explain travel that occurs faster than the speed of light - the ultimate of
speed limits. Or consider the work of the legendary physicist, David Bohm, with his explicate
(physical) and implicate (non-physical) multidimensional model of reality.
This is no mere theory - the 1982 Aspect Experiment in France demonstrated, that two
once-connected quantum particles separated by vast distances remained somehow connected.
If one particle was changed, the other changed - instantly. Scientists don’t know the
mechanics of how this faster-than-the-speed-of-light travel can happen, though some theorists
suggest that this connection takes place via doorways into higher dimensions.
So contrary to what those who pledge their allegiance to the traditional paradigm might
think, the influential, pioneering individuals I spoke with felt that we have not reached the
pinnacle of human development, we are connected, rather than separate, from all of life, and
that the full spectrum of consciousness encompasses both physical and a multitude of
nonphysical dimensions of reality.
At core, this new world view involves seeing yourself, others, and all of life, not through
the eyes of our small, earthly self that lives in time and is born in time. But rather through the
eyes of the soul, our Being, the True Self. One by one, people are jumping to this higher
orbit.
With his book, The Power of Now, Eckhart Tolle rightfully takes his place among this special
group of world-class teachers. Eckhart s message: the problem of humanity is deeply rooted
in the mind itself. Or rather, our misidentification with mind.
Our drifting awareness, our tendency to take the path of least resistance by being less
than fully awake to the present moment, creates a void. And the time-bound mind, which has
been designed to be a useful servant, compensates by proclaiming itself master. Like a
butterfly flittering from one flower to another, the mind engages past experiences or,
projecting its own made-for-television movie, anticipates what is to come. Seldom do we find
ourselves resting in the oceanic depth of the here and now. For it is here - in the Now - where
we find our True Self, which lies behind our physical body, shifting emotions, and chattering
mind.
The crowning glory of human development rests not in our ability to reason and think,
though this is what distinguishes us from animals. Intellect, like instinct, is merely a point
along the way. Our ultimate destiny is to re-connect with our essential Being and express
from our extraordinary, divine reality in the ordinary physical world, moment by moment.
Easy to say, yet rare are those who have attained the further reaches of human development.
Fortunately, there are guides and teachers to help us along the way. As a teacher and
guide, Eckhart s formidable power lies not in his adept ability to delight us with entertaining
stories, make the abstract concrete, or provide useful technique. Rather, his magic is seated in
his personal experience, as one who knows. As a result, there is a power behind his words
found only in the most celebrated of spiritual teachers. By living from the depths of this
Greater Reality, Eckhart clears an energetic pathway for others to join him.
And what if others do? Surely the world as we know it would change for the better.
Values would shift in the flotsam of vanishing fears that have been funneled away through
the whirlpool of Being itself. A new civilization would be born.
"Where's the proof of this Greater Reality?" you ask. I offer only an analogy: A battery of
scientists can get together and tell you about all the scientific proof for the fact that bananas
are bitter. But all you have to do is taste one, once, to realize that there is this whole other
aspect to bananas. Ultimately, proof lies not in intellectual arguments, but in being touched in
some way by the sacred within and without.
Eckhart Tolle masterfully opens us to that possibility.
Russell E. DiCarlo

Author, Towards a New World View:
Conversations at the Leading Edge
Erie, Pennsylvania U.S.A. January 1998

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am deeply thankful to Connie Kellough for her loving support and her vital part in
transforming the manuscript into this book and bringing it out into the world. It is a joy to
work with her.
I extend my gratitude to Corea Ladner and those wonderful people who have contributed
to this book by giving me space, that most precious of gifts - space to write and space to be.
Thank you to Adrienne Bradley in Vancouver, to Margaret Miller in London and Angie
Francesco in Glastonbury, England, Richard in Menlo Park and Rennie Frumkin in Sausalito,
California.
I am also thankful to Shirley Spaxman and Howard Kellough for their early review of the
manuscript and helpful feedback as well as to those individuals who were kind enough to
review the manuscript at a later stage and provide additional input. Thank you to Rose
Dendewich for word-processing the manuscript in her unique cheerful and professional
manner.
Finally, I would like to express my love and gratitude to my mother and father, without
whom this book would not have come into existence, to my spiritual teachers, and to the
greatest guru of all: life.

INTRODUCTION
THE ORIGIN OF THIS BOOK
I have little use for the past and rarely think about it; however, I would briefly like to tell you
how I came to be a spiritual teacher and how this book came into existence.
Until my thirtieth year, I lived in a state of almost continuous anxiety interspersed with
periods of suicidal depression. It feels now as if I am talking about some past lifetime or
somebody else's life.
One night not long after my twenty-ninth birthday, I woke up in the early hours with a
feeling of absolute dread. I had woken up with such a feeling many times before, but this
time it was more intense than it had ever been. The silence of the night, the vague outlines of
the furniture in the dark room, the distant noise of a passing train - everything felt so alien, so
hostile, and so utterly meaningless that it created in me a deep loathing of the world. The
most loathsome thing of all, however, was my own existence. What was the point in continuing to live with this burden of misery? Why carry on with this continuous struggle? I could
feel that a deep longing for annihilation, for nonexistence, was now becoming much stronger
than the instinctive desire to continue to live.
"I cannot live with myself any longer." This was the thought that kept repeating itself in
my mind. Then suddenly I became aware of what a peculiar thought it was. "Am I one or
two? If I cannot live with myself, there must be two of me: the ‘I’ and the ‘self’ that ‘I’
cannot live with." "Maybe," I thought, "only one of them is real."
I was so stunned by this strange realization that my mind stopped. I was fully conscious,
but there were no more thoughts. Then I felt drawn into what seemed like a vortex of energy.
It was a slow movement at first and then accelerated. I was gripped by an intense fear, and
my body started to shake. I heard the words "resist nothing," as if spoken inside my chest. I
could feel myself being sucked into a void. It felt as if the void was inside myself rather than
outside. Suddenly, there was no more fear, and I let myself fall into that void. I have no
recollection of what happened after that.
I was awakened by the chirping of a bird outside the window. I had never heard such a
sound before. My eyes were still closed, and I saw the image of a precious diamond. Yes, if a
diamond could make a sound, this is what it would be like. I opened my eyes. The first light
of dawn was filtering through the curtains. Without any thought, I felt, I knew, that there is
infinitely more to light than we realize. That soft luminosity filtering through the curtains was
love itself. Tears came into my eyes. I got up and walked around the room. I recognized the
room, and yet I knew that I had never truly seen it before. Everything was fresh and pristine,
as if it had just come into existence. I picked up things, a pencil, an empty bottle, marveling
at the beauty and aliveness of it all.
That day I walked around the city in utter amazement at the miracle of life on earth, as if
I had just been born into this world.
For the next five months, I lived in a state of uninterrupted deep peace and bliss. After
that, it diminished somewhat in intensity, or perhaps it just seemed to because it became my
natural state. I could still function in the world, although I realized that nothing I ever did
could possibly add anything to what I already had.
I knew, of course, that something profoundly significant had happened to me, but I didn't
understand it at all. It wasn't until several years later, after I had read spiritual texts and spent
time with spiritual teachers, that I realized that what everybody was looking for had already
happened to me. I understood that the intense pressure of suffering that night must have
forced my consciousness to withdraw from its identification with the unhappy and deeply
fearful self, which is ultimately a fiction of the mind. This withdrawal must have been so
complete that this false, suffering self immediately collapsed, just as if a plug had been pulled
out of an inflatable toy. What was left then was my true nature as the ever-present I am: con-
sciousness in its pure state prior to identification with form. Later I also learned to go into
that inner timeless and deathless realm that I had originally perceived as a void and remain
fully conscious. I dwelt in states of such indescribable bliss and sacredness that even the
original experience I just described pales in comparison. A time came when, for a while, I
was left with nothing on the physical plane. I had no relationships, no job, no home, no
socially defined identity. I spent almost two years sitting on park benches in a state of the
most intense joy.
But even the most beautiful experiences come and go. More fundamental, perhaps, than
any experience is the undercurrent of peace that has never left me since then. Sometimes it is
very strong, almost palpable, and others can feel it too. At other times, it is somewhere in the
background, like a distant melody.
Later, people would occasionally come up to me and say. "I want what you have. Can you
give it to me, or show me how to get it?" And I would say. "You have it already. You just
can't feel it because your mind is making too much noise." That answer later grew into the
book that you are holding in your hands.
Before I knew it, I had an external identity again. I had become a spiritual teacher.
THE TRUTH THAT IS WITHIN YOU

This book represents the essence of my work, as far as it can be conveyed in words, with
individuals and small groups of spiritual seekers during the past ten years, in Europe and in
North America. In deep love and appreciation, I would like to thank those exceptional people
for their courage, their willingness to embrace inner change, their challenging questions, and
their readiness to listen. This book would not have come into existence without them. They
belong to what is as yet a small but fortunately growing minority of spiritual pioneers: people
who are reaching a point where they become capable of breaking out of inherited collective
mind-patterns that have kept humans in bondage to suffering for eons.
I trust that this book will find its way to those who are ready for such radical inner
transformation and so act as a catalyst for it. I also hope that it will reach many others who
will find its content worthy of consideration, although they may not be ready to fully live or
practice it. It is possible that at a later time, the seed that was sown when reading this book
will merge with the seed of enlightenment that each human being carries within, and
suddenly that seed will sprout and come alive within them.
The book in its present form originated, often spontaneously, in response to questions asked
by individuals in seminars, meditation classes and private counseling sessions, and so I have
kept the question-and-answer format. I learned and received as much in those classes and
sessions as the questioners. Some of the questions and answers I wrote down almost
verbatim. Others are generic, which is to say I combined certain types of questions that were
frequently asked into one, and extracted the essence from different answers to form one
generic answer. Sometimes, in the process of writing, an entirely new answer came that was
more profound or insightful provide further clarification of certain points.
You will find that from the first to the last page, the dialogues continuously alternate
between two different levels.
On one level, I draw your attention to what is false in you. I speak of the nature of
human unconsciousness and dysfunction as well as its most common behavioral
manifestations, from conflict in relationships to warfare between tribes or nations. Such
knowledge is vital, for unless you learn to recognize the false as false - as not you - there can
be no lasting transformation, and you would always end up being drawn back into illusion
and into some form of pain. On this level, I also show you how not to make that which is
false in you into a self and into a personal problem, for that is how the false perpetuates
itself.
On another level, I speak of a profound transformation of human consciousness - not as a
distant future possibility, but available now - no matter who or where you are. You are shown
how to free yourself from enslavement to the mind, enter into this enlightened state of
consciousness and sustain it in everyday life.
On this level of the book, the words are not always concerned with information, but often
designed to draw you into this new consciousness as you read. Again and again, I endeavor to
take you with me into that timeless state of intense conscious presence in the Now, so as to
give you a taste of enlightenment. Until you are able to experience what I speak of, you may
find those passages somewhat repetitive. As soon as you do, however, I believe you will
realize that they contain a great deal of spiritual power, and they may become for you the
most rewarding parts of the book. Moreover, since every person carries the seed of
enlightenment within, I often address myself to the knower in you who dwells behind the
thinker, the deeper self that immediately recognizes spiritual truth, resonates with it, and
gains strength from it.
The pause symbol § after certain passages is a suggestion that you may want to stop reading
for a moment, become still, and feel and experience the truth of what has just been said.
There may be other places in the text where you will do this naturally and spontaneously.
As you begin reading the book, the meaning of certain words, such as "Being" or
"presence," may not be entirely clear to you at first. Just read on. Questions or objections may
occasionally come into your mind as you read. They will probably be answered later in the
book, or they may turn out to be irrelevant as you go more deeply into the teaching - and into
yourself.
Don't read with the mind only. Watch out for any "feeling-response" as you read and a
sense of recognition from deep within. I cannot tell you any spiritual truth that deep within
you don't know already. All I can do is remind you of what you have forgotten. Living
knowledge, ancient and yet ever new, is then activated and released from within every cell of
your body.
The mind always wants to categorize and compare, but this book will work better for
you if you do not attempt to compare its terminology with that of other teachings;
otherwise, you will probably become confused. I use words such as "mind," "happiness,"
and "consciousness" in ways that do not necessarily correlate with other teachings. Don't
get attached to any words. They are only stepping stones, to be left behind as quickly as
possible.
When I occasionally quote the words of Jesus or the Buddha, from A Course in Miracles
or from other teachings, I do so not in order to compare, but to draw your attention to the
fact that in essence there is and always has been only one spiritual teaching, although it
comes in many forms. Some of these forms, such as the ancient religions, have become
so overlaid with extraneous matter that their spiritual essence has become almost
completely obscured by it. To a large extent, therefore, their deeper meaning is no longer
recognized and their transformative power lost. When I quote from the ancient religions
or other teachings, it is to reveal their deeper meaning and thereby restore their
transformative power - particularly for those readers who are followers of these religions
or teachings. I say to them: there is no need to go elsewhere for the truth. Let me show
you how to go more deeply into what you already have.
Mostly, however, I have endeavored to use terminology that is as neutral as possible
in order to reach a wide range of people. This book can be seen as a restatement for our
time of that one timeless spiritual teaching, the essence of all religions. It is not derived
from external sources, but from the one true Source within, so it contains no theory or
speculation. I speak from inner experience, and if at times I speak forcefully, it is to cut
through heavy layers of mental resistance and to reach that place within you where you
already know, just as I know, and where the truth is recognized when it is heard. There is
then a feeling of exaltation and heightened aliveness, as something within you says:
"Yes. I know this is true."2
CHAPTER ONE

YOU ARE NOT YOUR MIND
THE GREATEST OBSTACLE TO ENLIGHTENMENT
Enlightenment - what is that?
A beggar had been sitting by the side of a road for over thirty years. One day a stranger
walked by. "Spare some change?" mumbled the beggar, mechanically holding out his old
baseball cap. "I have nothing to give you," said the stranger. Then he asked: "What's that you
are sitting on?" "Nothing," replied the beggar. "Just an old box. I have been sitting on it for as
long as I can remember." "Ever looked inside?" asked the stranger. "No," said the beggar.
"What's the point? There's nothing in there." "Have a look inside," insisted the stranger. The
beggar managed to pry open the lid. With astonishment, disbelief, and elation, he saw that the
box was filled with gold.
I am that stranger who has nothing to give you and who is telling you to look inside. Not
inside any box, as in the parable, but somewhere even closer inside yourself.
"But I am not a beggar," I can hear you say.
Those who have not found their true wealth, which is the radiant joy of Being and the
deep, unshakable peace that comes with it, are beggars, even if they have great material
wealth. They are looking outside for scraps of pleasure or fulfillment, for validation, security,
or love, while they have a treasure within that not only includes all those things but is
infinitely greater than anything the world can offer.
The word enlightenment conjures up the idea of some superhuman accomplishment, and
the ego likes to keep it that way, but it is simply your natural state of felt oneness with Being.
It is a state of connectedness with something immeasurable and indestructible, something
that, almost paradoxically, is essentially you and yet is much greater than you. It is finding
your true nature beyond name and form. The inability to feel this connectedness gives rise to
the illusion of separation, from yourself and from the world around you. You then perceive
yourself, consciously or unconsciously, as an isolated fragment. Fear arises, and conflict
within and without becomes the norm.
I love the Buddha's simple definition of enlightenment as "the end of suffering." There is
nothing superhuman in that, is there? Of course, as a definition, it is incomplete. It only tells
you what enlightenment is not: no suffering. But what's left when there is no more suffering?
The Buddha is silent on that, and his silence implies that you'll have to find out for yourself.
He uses a negative definition so that the mind cannot make it into something to believe in or
into a superhuman accomplishment, a goal that is impossible for you to attain. Despite this
precaution, the majority of Buddhists still believe that enlightenment is for the Buddha, not
for them, at least not in this lifetime.
You used the word Being. Can you explain what you mean by that?
Being is the eternal, ever-present One Life beyond the myriad forms of life that are subject
to birth and death. However, Being is not only beyond but also deep within every form as its
innermost invisible and indestructible essence. This means that it is accessible to you now as
your own deepest self, your true nature. But don't seek to grasp it with your mind. Don't try
to understand it. You can know it only when the mind is still. When you are present, when
your attention is fully and intensely in the Now, Being can be felt, but it can never be understood mentally. To regain awareness of Being and to abide in that state of "feelingrealization" is enlightenment.

§
When you say Being, are you talking about God? If you are, then why don't you say it?
The word God has become empty of meaning through thousands of years of misuse. I use it
sometimes, but I do so sparingly. By misuse, I mean that people who have never even
glimpsed the realm of the sacred, the infinite vastness behind that word, use it with great conviction, as if they knew what they are talking about. Or they argue against it, as if they knew
what it is that they are denying. This misuse gives rise to absurd beliefs, assertions, and egoic
delusions, such as "My or our God is the only true God, and your God is false," or Nietzsche's
famous statement "God is dead."
The word God has become a closed concept. The moment the word is uttered, a mental
image is created, no longer, perhaps, of an old man with a white beard, but still a mental
representation of someone or something outside you, and, yes, almost inevitably a male
someone or something.
Neither God nor Being nor any other word can define or explain the ineffable reality
behind the word, so the only important question is whether the word is a help or a hindrance
in enabling you to experience That toward which it points. Does it point beyond itself to that
transcendental reality, or does it lend itself too easily to becoming no more than an idea in
your head that you believe in, a mental idol?
The word Being explains nothing, but nor does God. Being, however, has the advantage
that it is an open concept. It does not reduce the infinite invisible to a finite entity. It is
impossible to form a mental image of it. Nobody can claim exclusive possession of Being. It
is your very essence, and it is immediately accessible to you as the feeling of your own
presence, the realization I am that is prior to I am this or I am that. So it is only a small step
from the word Being to the experience of Being.

§
What is the greatest obstacle to experiencing this reality?

Identification with your mind, which causes thought to become compulsive. Not to be able
to stop thinking is a dreadful affliction, but we don't realize this because almost everybody
is suffering from it, so it is considered normal. This incessant mental noise prevents you
from finding that realm of inner stillness that is inseparable from Being. It also creates a
false mind-made self that casts a shadow of fear and suffering. We will look at all that in
more detail later.
The philosopher Descartes believed that he had found the most fundamental truth when
he made his famous statement: "I think, therefore I am." He had, in fact, given expression to
the most basic error to equate thinking with Being and identity with thinking. The compulsive
thinker, which means almost everyone, lives in a state of apparent separateness, in an
insanely complex world of continuous problems and conflict, a world that reflects the everincreasing fragmentation of the mind. Enlightenment is a state of wholeness, of being "at
one" and therefore at peace. At one with life in its manifested aspect, the world, as well as
with your deepest self and life unmanifested - at one with Being. Enlightenment is not only
the end of suffering and of continuous conflict within and without, but also the end of the
dreadful enslavement to incessant thinking. What an incredible liberation this is!
Identification with your mind creates an opaque screen of concepts, labels, images,
words, judgments, and definitions that blocks all true relationship. It comes between you and
yourself, between you and your fellow man and woman, between you and nature, between
you and God. It is this screen of thought that creates the illusion of separateness, the illusion
that there is you and a totally separate "other." You then forget the essential fact that,
underneath the level of physical appearances and separate forms, you are one with all that is.
By "forget," I mean that you can no longer feel this oneness as self-evident reality. You may
believe it to be true, but you no longer know it to be true. A belief may be comforting. Only
through your own experience, however, does it become liberating.
Thinking has become a disease. Disease happens when things get out of balance. For
example, there is nothing wrong with cells dividing and multiplying in the body, but when
this process continues in disregard of the total organism, cells proliferate and we have
disease.
The mind is a superb instrument if used rightly. Used wrongly, however, it becomes
very destructive. To put it more accurately, it is not so much that you use your mind
wrongly - you usually don't use it at all. It uses you. This is the disease. You believe that
you are your mind. This is the delusion. The instrument has taken you over.
I don't quite agree. It is true that I do a lot of aimless thinking, like most people, but I can still choose
to use my mind to get and accomplish things, and I do that all the time.

Just because you can solve a crossword puzzle or build an atom bomb doesn't mean that
you use your mind. Just as dogs love to chew bones, the mind loves to get its teeth into
problems. That's why it does crossword puzzles and builds atom bombs. You have, no interest in either. Let me ask you this: can you be free of your mind whenever you want to?
Have you found the "off" button?
You mean stop thinking altogether? No, I can't, except maybe for a moment or two.

Then the mind is using you. You are unconsciously identified with it, so you don't even know
that you are its slave. It’s almost as if you were possessed without knowing it, and so you
take the possessing entity to be yourself. The beginning of freedom is the realization that you
are not the possessing entity - the thinker. Knowing this enables you to observe the entity.
The moment you start watching the thinker, a higher level of consciousness becomes
activated. You then begin to realize that there is a vast realm of intelligence beyond thought,
that thought is only a tiny aspect of that intelligence. You also realize that all the things that
truly matter - beauty, love, creativity, joy, inner peace - arise from beyond the mind. You
begin to awaken.

§
FREEING YOURSELF FROM YOUR MIND

What exactly do you mean by "watching the thinker"?

When someone goes to the doctor and says, "I hear a voice in my head," he or she will most
likely be sent to a psychiatrist. The fact is that, in a very similar way, virtually everyone hears
a voice, or several voices, in their head all the time: the involuntary thought processes that
you don't realize you have the power to stop. Continuous monologues or dialogues.
You have probably come across "mad" people in the street incessantly talking or
muttering to themselves. Well, that's not much different from what you and all other "normal"
people do, except that you don't do it out loud. The voice comments, speculates, judges,
compares, complains, likes, dislikes, and so on. The voice isn't necessarily relevant to the
situation you find yourself in at the time; it may be reviving the recent or distant past or
rehearsing or imagining possible future situations. Here it often imagines things going wrong
and negative outcomes; this is called worry. Sometimes this soundtrack is accompanied by
visual images or "mental movies."
Even if the voice is relevant to the situation at hand, it will interpret it in terms of the
past. This is because the voice belongs to your conditioned mind, which is the result of all
your past history as well as of the collective cultural mind-set you inherited. So you see and
judge the present through the eyes of the past and get a totally distorted view of it. It is not
uncommon for the voice to be a person's own worst enemy. Many people live with a
tormentor in their head that continuously attacks and punishes them and drains them of vital
energy. It is the cause of untold misery and unhappiness, as well as of disease.
The good news is that you can free yourself from your mind. This is the only true
liberation. You can take the first step right now. Start listening to the voice in your head as
often as you can. Pay particular attention to any repetitive thought patterns, those old
gramophone records that have been playing in your head perhaps for many years. This is
what I mean by "watching the thinker," which is another way of saying: listen to the voice in
your head, be there as the witnessing presence.
When you listen to that voice, listen to it impartially. That is to say, do not judge. Do not
judge or condemn what you hear, for doing so would mean that the same voice has come in
again through the back door. You'll soon realize: there is the voice, and here I am listening to
it, watching it. This I am realization, this sense of your own presence, is not a thought. It
arises from beyond the mind.

§
So when you listen to a thought, you are aware not only of the thought but also of
yourself as the witness of the thought. A new dimension of consciousness has come in. As
you listen to the thought, you feel a conscious presence - your deeper self - behind or
underneath the thought, as it were. The thought then loses its power over you and quickly
subsides, because you are no longer energizing the mind through identification with it. This is the
beginning of the end of involuntary and compulsive thinking.
When a thought subsides, you experience a discontinuity in the mental stream - a gap of
"no-mind." At first, the gaps will be short, a few seconds perhaps, but gradually they will
become longer. When these gaps occur, you feel a certain stillness and peace inside you. This
is the beginning of your natural state of felt oneness with Being, which is usually obscured by
the mind. With practice, the sense of stillness and peace will deepen. In fact, there is no end
to its depth. You will also feel a subtle emanation of joy arising from deep within: the joy of
Being.
It is not a trancelike state. Not at all. There is no loss of consciousness here. The opposite
is the case. If the price of peace were a lowering of your consciousness, and the price of
stillness a lack of vitality and alertness, then they would not be worth having. In this state of
inner connectedness, you are much more alert, more awake than in the mind-identified state.
You are fully present. It also raises the vibrational frequency of the energy field that gives life
to the physical body.
As you go more deeply into this realm of no-mind, as it is sometimes called in the East,
you realize the state of pure consciousness. In that state, you feel your own presence with
such intensity and such joy that all thinking, all emotions, your physical body, as well as the
whole external world become relatively insignificant in comparison to it. And yet this is not a
selfish but a selfless state. It takes you beyond what you previously thought of as "your self."
That presence is essentially you and at the same time inconceivably greater than you. What I
am trying to convey here may sound paradoxical or even contradictory, but there is no other
way that I can express it.

§
Instead of "watching the thinker," you can also create a gap in the mind stream simply by
directing the focus of your attention into the Now. Just become intensely conscious of the
present moment. This is a deeply satisfying thing to do. In this way, you draw consciousness
away from mind activity and create a gap of no-mind in which you are highly alert and aware
but not thinking. This is the essence of meditation.
In your everyday life, you can practice this by taking any routine activity that normally is
only a means to an end and giving it your fullest attention, so that it becomes an end in itself.
For example, every time you walk up and down the stairs in your house or place of work, pay
close attention to every step, every movement, even your breathing. Be totally present. Or
when you wash your hands, pay attention to all the sense perceptions associated with the
activity the sound and feel of the water, the movement of your hands, the scent of the soap,
and so on. Or when you get into your car, after you close the door, pause for a few seconds
and observe the flow of your breath. Become aware of a silent but powerful sense of
presence. There is one certain criterion by which you can measure your success in this
practice: the degree of peace that you feel within.

§
So the single most vital step on your journey toward enlightenment is this: learn to
disidentify from your mind. Every time you create a gap in the -stream of mind, the light of
your consciousness grows stronger.
One day you may catch yourself smiling at the voice in your head, as you would smile at
the antics of a child. This means that you no longer take the content of your mind all that
seriously, as your sense of self does not depend on it.
ENLIGHTENMENT: RISING ABOVE THOUGHT

Isn't thinking essential in order to survive in this world?

Your mind is an instrument, a tool. It is there to be used for a specific task, and when the task
is completed, you lay it down. As it is, I would say about 8o to go percent of most people's
thinking is not only repetitive and useless, but because of its dysfunctional and often negative
nature, much of it is also harmful. Observe your mind and you will find this to be true. It
causes a serious leakage of vital energy.
This kind of compulsive thinking is actually an addiction. What characterizes an
addiction? Quite simply this: you no longer feel that you have the choice to stop. It seems
stronger than you. It also gives you a false sense of pleasure, pleasure that invariably turns
into pain.
Why should we be addicted to thinking?

Because you are identified with it, which means that you derive your sense of self from the
content and activity of your mind. Because you believe that you would cease to be if you
stopped thinking. As you grow up, you form a mental image of who you are, based on your
personal and cultural conditioning. We may call this phantom self the ego. It consists of mind
activity and can only be kept going through constant thinking. The term ego means different
things to different people, but when I use it here it means a false self, created by unconscious
identification with the mind.
To the ego, the present moment hardly exists. Only past and future are considered
important. This total reversal of the truth accounts for the fact that in the ego mode the mind
is so dysfunctional. It is always concerned with keeping the past alive, because without it who are you? It constantly projects itself into the future to ensure its continued survival and
to seek some kind of release or fulfillment there. It says: "One day, when this, that, or the
other happens, I am going to be okay, happy, at peace." Even when the ego seems to be
concerned with the present, it is not the present that it sees: It misperceives it completely
because it looks at it through the eyes of the past. Or it reduces the present to a means to an
end, an end that always lies in the mind-projected future. Observe your mind and you'll see
that this is how it works.
The present moment holds the key to liberation. But you cannot find the present moment
as long as you are your mind.
I don't want to lose my ability to analyze and discriminate. I wouldn't mind learning to think more
clearly, in a more focused way, but I don't want to lose my mind. The gift of thought is the most
precious thing we have. Without it, we would just be another species of animal.

The predominance of mind is no more than a stage in the evolution of consciousness. We
need to go on to the next stage now as a matter of urgency, otherwise, we will be destroyed
by the mind, which has grown into a monster. I will talk about this in more detail later.
Thinking and consciousness are not synonymous. Thinking is only a small aspect of
consciousness. Thought cannot exist without consciousness, but consciousness does not need
thought.
Enlightenment means rising above thought, not falling back to a level below thought, the
level of an animal or a plant. In the enlightened state, you still use your thinking mind when
needed, but in a much more focused and effective way than before. You use it mostly for
practical purposes, but you are free of the involuntary internal dialogue, and there is inner
stillness. When you do use your mind, and particularly when a creative solution is needed,
you oscillate every few minutes or so between thought and stillness, between mind and nomind. No-mind is consciousness without thought. Only in that way is it possible to think
creatively, because only in that way does thought have any real power. Thought alone, when
it is no longer connected with the much vaster realm of consciousness, quickly becomes barren, insane, destructive.
The mind is essentially a survival machine. Attack and defense against other minds,
gathering, storing, and analyzing information - this is what it is good at, but it is not at all
creative. All true artists, whether they know it or not, create from a place of no-mind, from
inner stillness. The mind then gives form to the creative impulse or insight. Even the great
scientists have reported that their creative breakthroughs came at a time of mental quietude.
The surprising result of a nation-wide inquiry among America's most eminent
mathematicians, including Einstein, to find out their working methods, was that thinking
"plays only a subordinate part in the brief, decisive phase of the creative act itself." So I
would say that the simple reason why the majority of scientists are not creative is not because
they don't know how to think but because they don't know how to stop thinking!
It wasn’t through the mind, through thinking, that the miracle that is life on earth or your
body were created and are being sustained. There is clearly an intelligence at work that is far
greater than the mind. How can a single human cell measuring 1/1,000 of an inch across
contain instructions within its DNA that would fill 1,000 books of 100 pages each? The more
we learn about the workings of the body, the more we realize just how vast is the intelligence
at work within it and how little we know. When the mind reconnects with that, it becomes a
most wonderful tool. It then serves something greater than itself.
EMOTION: THE BODY'S REACTION TO YOUR MIND

What about emotions? I get caught up in my emotions more than I do in my mind.

Mind, in the way I use the word, is not just thought. It includes your emotions as well as all
unconscious mental-emotional reactive patterns. Emotion arises at the place where mind and
body meet. It is the body's reaction to your mind - or you might say, a reflection of your mind
in the body. For example, an attack thought or a hostile thought will create a build-up of
energy in the body that we call anger. The body is getting ready to fight. The thought that you
are being threatened, physically or psychologically, causes the body to contract, and this is
the physical side of what we call fear. Research has shown that strong emotions even cause
changes in the biochemistry of the body. These biochemical changes represent the physical or
material aspect of the emotion. Of course, you are not usually conscious of all your thought
patterns, and it is often only through watching your emotions that you can bring them into
awareness.
The more you are identified with your thinking, your likes and dislikes, judgments and
interpretations, which is to say the less present you are as the watching consciousness, the
stronger the emotional energy charge will be, whether you are aware of it or not. If you
cannot feel your emotions, if you are cut off from them, you will eventually experience them
on a purely physical level, as a physical problem or symptom. A great deal has been written
about this in recent years, so we don't need to go into it here. A strong unconscious emotional
pattern may even manifest as an external event that appears to just happen to you. For
example, I have observed that people who carry a lot of anger inside without being aware of
it and without expressing it are more likely to be attacked, verbally or even physically, by
other angry people, and often for no apparent reason. They have a strong emanation of anger
that certain people pick up subliminally and that triggers their own latent anger.
If you have difficulty feeling your emotions, start by focusing attention on the inner
energy field of your body. Feel the body from within. This will also put you in touch with
your emotions. We will explore this in more detail later.

§
You say that an emotion is the mind's reflection in the body. But sometimes there is a conflict
between the two: the mind says "no" while the emotion says "yes," or the other way around.

If you really want to know your mind, the body will always give you a truthful reflection, so
look at the emotion or rather feel it in your body. If there is an apparent conflict between
them, the thought will be the lie, the emotion will be the truth. Not the ultimate truth of who
you are, but the relative truth of your state of mind at that time.
Conflict between surface thoughts and unconscious mental processes is certainly
common. You may not yet be able to bring your unconscious mind activity into awareness as
thoughts, but it will always be reflected in the body as an emotion, and of this you can become
aware. To watch an emotion in this way is basically the same as listening to or watching a
thought, which I described earlier. The only difference is that, while a thought is in your
head, an emotion has a strong physical component and so is primarily felt in the body. You
can then allow the emotion to be there without being controlled by it. You no longer are the
emotion; you are the watcher, the observing presence. If you practice this, all that is
unconscious in you will be brought into the light of consciousness.
So observing our emotions is as important as observing our thoughts?

Yes. Make it a habit to ask yourself ‘What's going on inside me at this moment?’ That
question will point you in the right direction. But don't analyze, just watch. Focus your
attention within. Feel the energy of the emotion. If there is no emotion present, take your
attention more deeply into the inner energy field of your body. It is the doorway into Being.

§
An emotion usually represents an amplified and energized thought pattern, and because of
its often overpowering energetic charge, it is not easy initially to stay present enough to be
able to watch it. It wants to take you over, and it usually succeeds - unless there is enough
presence in you. If you are pulled into unconscious identification with the emotion through
lack of presence, which is normal, the emotion temporarily becomes "you." Often a vicious
circle builds up between your thinking and the emotion: they feed each other. The thought
pattern creates a magnified reflection of itself in the form of an emotion, and the vibrational
frequency of the emotion keeps feeding the original thought pattern. By dwelling mentally
on the situation, event, or person that is the perceived cause of the emotion, the thought
feeds energy to the emotion, which in turn energizes the thought pattern, and so on.
Basically, all emotions are modifications of one primordial, undifferentiated emotion that
has its origin in the loss of awareness of who you are beyond name and form. Because of its
undifferentiated nature, it is hard to find a name that precisely describes this emotion. "Fear"
comes close, but apart from a continuous sense of threat, it also includes a deep sense of
abandonment and incompleteness. It may be best to use a term that is as undifferentiated as
that basic emotion and simply call it "pain." One of the main tasks of the mind is to fight or
remove that emotional pain, which is one of the reasons for its incessant activity, but all it can
ever achieve is to cover it up temporarily. In fact, the harder the mind struggles to get rid of
the pain, the greater the pain. The mind can never find the solution, nor can it afford to allow
you to find the solution, because it is itself an intrinsic part of the "problem." Imagine a chief
of police trying to find an arsonist when the arsonist is the chief of police. You will not be
free of that pain until you cease to derive your sense of self from identification with the mind,
which is to say from ego. The mind is then toppled from its place of power and Being reveals
itself as your true nature.
Yes, I know what you are going to ask.
I was going to ask: What about positive emotions such as love and joy?

They are inseparable from your natural state of inner connectedness with Being. Glimpses of
love and joy or brief moments of deep peace are possible whenever a gap occurs in the
stream of thought. For most people, such gaps happen rarely and only accidentally, in
moments when the mind is rendered "speechless," sometimes triggered by great beauty,
extreme physical exertion, or even great danger. Suddenly, there is inner stillness. And
within that stillness there is a subtle but intense joy, there is love, there is peace.
Usually, such moments are short-lived, as the mind quickly resumes its noise-making
activity that we call thinking. Love, joy, and peace cannot flourish until you have freed
yourself from mind dominance. But they are not what I would call emotions. They lie beyond
the emotions, on a much deeper level. So you need to become fully conscious of your
emotions and be able to feel them before you can feel that which lies beyond them. Emotion
literally means "disturbance." The word comes from the Latin emovere, meaning "to disturb."
Love, joy, and peace are deep states of Being or rather three aspects of the state of inner
connectedness with Being. As such, they have no opposite. This is because they arise from
beyond the mind. Emotions, on the other hand, being part of the dualistic mind, are subject to
the law of opposites. This simply means that you cannot have good without bad. So in the
unenlightened, mind-identified condition, what is sometimes wrongly called joy is the
usually short-lived pleasure side of the continuously alternating pain/pleasure cycle. Pleasure
is always derived from something outside you, whereas joy arises from within. The very
thing that gives you pleasure today will give you pain tomorrow, or it will leave you, so its
absence will give you pain. And what is often referred to as love may be pleasurable and
exciting for a while, but it is an addictive clinging, an extremely needy condition that can turn
into its opposite at the flick of a switch. Many "love" relationships, after the initial euphoria
has passed, actually oscillate between "love" and hate, attraction and attack.
Real love doesn't make you suffer. How could it? It doesn't suddenly turn into hate, nor
does real joy turn into pain. As I said, even before you are enlightened - before you have
freed yourself from your mind - you may get glimpses of true joy, true love, or of a deep
inner peace, still but vibrantly alive. These are aspects of your true nature, which is usually
obscured by the mind. Even within a "normal” addictive relationship, there can be moments
when the presence of something more genuine, something incorruptible, can be felt. But they
will only be glimpses, soon to be covered up again through mind interference. It may then
seem that you had something very precious and lost it, or your mind may convince you that it
was all an illusion anyway. The truth is that it wasn't an illusion, and you cannot lose it. It is
part of your natural state, which can be obscured but can never be destroyed by the mind.
Even when the sky is heavily overcast, the sun hasn't disappeared. It’s still there on the other
side of the clouds.

The Buddha says that pain or suffering arises through desire or craving and
that to be free of pain we need to cut the bonds of desire.
All cravings are the mind seeking salvation or fulfillment in external things and in the future
as a substitute for the joy of Being. As long as I am my mind, I am those cravings, those
needs, wants, attachments, and aversions, and apart from them there is no "I" except as a
mere possibility, an unfulfilled potential, a seed that has not yet sprouted. In that state, even
my desire to become free or enlightened is just another craving for fulfillment or completion
in the future. So don't seek to become free of desire or "achieve" enlightenment. Become
present. Be there as the observer of the mind. Instead of quoting the Buddha, be the Buddha,
be "the awakened one," which is what the word buddha means.
Humans have been in the grip of pain for eons, ever since they fell from the state of
grace, entered the realm of time and mind, and lost awareness of Being. At that point, they
started to perceive themselves as meaningless fragments in an alien universe, unconnected to
the Source and to each other.
Pain is inevitable as long as you are identified with your mind, which is to say as long as
you are unconscious, spiritually speaking.
I am talking here primarily of emotional pain, which is also the main cause of physical
pain and physical disease. Resentment, hatred, self-pity, guilt, anger, depression, jealousy,
and so on, even the slightest irritation, are all forms of pain. And every pleasure or emotional
high contains within itself the seed of pain: its inseparable opposite, which will manifest in
time.
Anybody who has ever taken drugs to get “high” will know that the high eventually turns
into a low, that the pleasure turns into some form of pain. Many people also know from their
own experience how easily and quickly an intimate relationship can turn from a source of
pleasure to a source of pain. Seen from a higher perspective, both the negative and the
positive polarities are faces of the same coin, are both part of the underlying pain that is
inseparable from the mind-identified egoic state of consciousness.
There are two levels to your pain: the pain that you create now, and the pain from the past
that still lives on in your mind and body. Ceasing to create pain in the present and dissolving
past pain - this is what I want to talk about now.

CONSCIOUSNESS:
THE WAY OUT OF PAIN
CREATE NO MORE PAIN IN THE PRESENT

Nobody's life is entirely free of pain and sorrow. Isn't it a question of learning to live with them
rather than trying to avoid them?

The greater part of human pain is unnecessary. It is self-created as long as the unobserved
mind runs your life.
The pain that you create now is always some form of nonacceptance, some form of
unconscious resistance to what is. On the level of thought, the resistance is some form of
judgment. On the emotional level, it is some form of negativity. The intensity of the pain
depends on the degree of resistance to the present moment, and this in turn depends on how
strongly you are identified with your mind. The mind always seeks to deny the Now and to
escape from it. In other words, the more you are identified with your mind, the more you
suffer. Or you may put it like this: the more you are able to honor and accept the Now, the
more ore you are free of pain, of suffering - and free of the egoic mind.
Why does the mind habitually deny or resist the Now? Because it cannot function and
remain in control without time, which is past and future, so it perceives the timeless Now as
threatening. Time and mind are in fact inseparable.
Imagine the Earth devoid of human life, inhabited only by plants and animals. Would it
still have a past and a future? Could we still speak of time in any meaningful way? The
question "What time is it?" or "What's the date today?" - if anybody were there to ask it would be quite meaningless. The oak tree or the eagle would be bemused by such a
question. "What time?" they would ask. "Well, of course, it's now. The time is now. What
else is there?"
Yes, we need the mind as well as time to function in this world, but there comes a point
where they take over our lives, and this is where dysfunction, pain, and sorrow set in.
The mind, to ensure that it remains in control, seeks continuously to cover up the present
moment with past and future, and so, as the vitality and infinite creative potential of Being,
which is inseparable from the Now, becomes covered up by time, your true nature becomes
obscured by the mind. An increasingly heavy burden of time has been accumulating in the
human mind. All individuals are suffering under this burden, but they also keep adding to it
every moment whenever they ignore or deny that precious moment or reduce it to a means of
getting to some future moment, which only exists in the mind, never in actuality. The
accumulation of time in the collective and individual human mind also holds a vast amount
of residual pain from the past.
If you no longer want to create pain for yourself and others, if you no longer want to add
to the residue of past pain that still lives on in you, then don't create any more time, or at least
no more than is necessary to deal with the practical aspects of your life. How to stop creating
time? Realize deeply that the present moment is all you ever have. Make the Now the
primary focus of your life. Whereas before you dwelt in time and paid brief visits to the Now,
have your dwelling place in the Now and pay brief visits to past and future when required to
deal with the practical aspects of your life situation. Always say "yes" to the present moment.
What could be more futile, more insane, than to create inner resistance to something that
already is? What could be more insane than to oppose life itself, which is now and always
now? Surrender to what is. Say "yes" to life - and see how life suddenly starts working for
you rather than against you.

§
The present moment is sometimes unacceptable, unpleasant, or awful.

It is as it is. Observe how the mind labels it and how this labeling process, this continuous
sitting in judgment, creates pain and unhappiness. By watching the mechanics of the mind,
you step out of its resistance patterns, and you can then allow the present moment to be. This
will give you a taste of the state of inner freedom from external conditions, the state of true
inner peace. Then see what happens, and take action if necessary or possible.
Accept - then act. Whatever the present moment contains, accept it as if you had chosen
it. Always work with it, not against it. Make it your friend and ally, not your enemy. This will
miraculously transform your whole life.

§
PAST PAIN: DISSOLVING THE PAIN-BODY

As long as you are unable to access the power of the Now, every emotional pain that you
experience leaves behind a residue of pain that lives on in you. It merges with the pain from
the past, which was already there, and becomes lodged in your mind and body. This, of
course, includes the pain you suffered as a child, caused by the unconsciousness of the world
into which you were born.
This accumulated pain is a negative energy field that occupies your body and mind. If
you look on it as an invisible entity in its own right, you are getting quite close to the truth.
It’s the emotional pain-body. It has two modes of being: dormant and active. A pain-body
may be dormant 90 percent of the time; in a deeply unhappy person, though, it may be active
up to 100 percent of the time. Some people live almost entirely through their pain-body,
while others may experience it only in certain situations, such as intimate relationships, or
situations linked with past loss or abandonment, physical or emotional hurt, and so on.
Anything can trigger it, particularly if it resonates with a pain pattern from your past. When it
is ready to awaken from its dormant stage, even a thought or an innocent remark made by
someone close to you can activate it.
Some pain-bodies are obnoxious but relatively harmless, for example like a child who
won’t stop whining. Others are vicious and destructive monsters, true demons. Some are
physically violent; many more are emotionally violent. Some will attack people around you
or close to you, while others may attack you, their host. Thoughts and feelings you have
about your life then become deeply negative and self-destructive. Illnesses and accidents are
often created in this way. Some pain-bodies drive their hosts to suicide.
When you thought you knew a person and then you are suddenly confronted with this
alien, nasty creature for the first time, you are in for quite a shock. However, it’s more
important to observe it in yourself than in someone else. Watch out for any sign of
unhappiness in yourself, in whatever form - it may be the awakening pain-body. This can
take the form of irritation, impatience, a somber mood, a desire to hurt, anger, rage,
depression, a need to have some drama in your relationship, and so on. Catch it the moment it
awakens from its dormant state.
The pain-body wants to survive, just like every other entity in existence, and it can only
survive if it gets you to unconsciously identify with it. It can then rise up, take you over,
"become you," and live through you. It needs to get its "food" through you. It will feed on
any experience that resonates with its own kind of energy, anything that creates further pain
in whatever form: anger, destructiveness, hatred, grief, emotional drama, violence, and even
illness. So the pain-body, when it has taken you over, will create a situation in your
life that reflects back its own energy frequency for it to feed on. Pain can only feed on pain.
Pain cannot feed on joy. It finds it quite indigestible.
Once the pain-body has taken you over, you want more pain. You become a victim or a
perpetrator. You want to inflict pain, or you want to suffer pain, or both. There isn't really
much difference between the two. You are not conscious of this, of course, and will
vehemently claim that you do not want pain. But look closely and you will find that your
thinking and behavior are designed to keep the pain going, for yourself and others. If you
were truly conscious of it, the pattern would dissolve, for to want more pain is insanity, and
nobody is consciously insane.
The pain-body, which is the dark shadow cast by the ego, is actually afraid of the light of
your consciousness. It is afraid of being found out. Its survival depends on your unconscious
identification with it, as well as on your unconscious fear of facing the pain that lives in you.
But if you don't face it, if you don't bring the light of your consciousness into the pain, you
will be forced to relive it again and again. The pain-body may seem to you like a dangerous
monster that you cannot bear to look at, but I assure you that it is an insubstantial phantom
that cannot prevail against the power of your presence.
Some spiritual teachings state that all pain is ultimately an illusion, and this is true. The
question is: Is it true for you? A mere belief doesn't make it true. Do you want to experience
pain for the rest of your life and keep saying that it is an illusion? Does that free you from the
pain? What we are concerned with here is how you can realize this truth - that is, make it real
in your own experience.
So the pain-body doesn't want you to observe it directly and see it for what it is. The
moment you observe it, feel its energy field within you, and take your attention into it, the
identification is broken. A higher dimension of consciousness has come in. I call it presence.
You are now the witness or the watcher of the pain-body. This means that it cannot use you
anymore by pretending to be you, and it can no longer replenish itself through you. You have
found your own innermost strength. You have accessed the power of Now.
What happens to the pain-body when we become conscious enough to break our identification with
it?

Unconsciousness creates it; consciousness transmutes it into itself. St. Paul expressed this
universal principle beautifully. "Everything is shown up by being exposed to the light, and
whatever is exposed to the light itself becomes light." Just as you cannot fight the darkness,
you cannot fight the pain-body. Trying to do so would create inner conflict and thus further
pain. Watching it is enough. Watching it implies accepting it as part of what is at that
moment.
The pain-body consists of trapped life-energy that has split off from your total energy
field and has temporarily become autonomous through the unnatural process of mind
identification. It has turned in on itself and become anti-life, like an animal trying to devour
its own tail. Why do you think our civilization has become so life-destructive? But even the
life-destructive forces are still life-energy.
When you start to disidentify and become the watcher, the pain-body will continue to
operate for a while and will try to trick you into identifying with it again. Although you are
no longer energizing it through your identification, it has a certain momentum, just like a
spinning wheel that will keep turning for a while even when it is no longer being propelled.
At this stage, it may also create physical aches and pains in different parts of the body, but
they won't last. Stay present, stay conscious. Be the ever-alert guardian of your inner space.
You need to be present enough to be able to watch the pain-body directly and feel its energy.
It then cannot control your thinking. The moment your thinking is aligned with the energy
field of the pain- body, you are identified with it and again feeding it with your thoughts.
For example, if anger is the predominant energy vibration of the pain-body and you think
angry thoughts, dwelling on what someone did to you or what you are going to do to him or
her, then you have become unconscious, and the pain-body has become "you." Where there is
anger, there is always pain underneath. Or when a dark mood comes upon you and you start
getting into a negative mind-pattern and thinking how dreadful your life is, your thinking has
become aligned with the pain-body, and you have become unconscious and vulnerable to the
pain-body's attack. "Unconscious," the way that I use the word here, means to be identified
with some mental or emotional pattern. It implies a complete absence of the watcher.
Sustained conscious attention severs the link between the pain-body and your thought
processes and brings about the process of transmutation. It is as if the pain becomes fuel for
the flame of your consciousness, which then burns more brightly as a result. This is the
esoteric meaning of the ancient art of alchemy, the transmutation of base metal into gold, of
suffering into consciousness. The split within is healed, and you become whole again. Your
responsibility then is not to create further pain.
Let me summarize the process. Focus attention on the feeling inside you. Know that it is
the pain-body. Accept that it is there. Don't think about it - don't let the feeling turn into
thinking. Don't judge or analyze. Don't make an identity for yourself out of it. Stay present,
and continue to be the observer of what is happening inside you. Become aware not only of
the emotional pain but also of "the one who observes," the silent watcher. This is the power
of the Now, the power of your own conscious presence. Then see what happens.

§
For many women, the pain-body awakens particularly at the time preceding the menstrual
flow. I will talk about this and the reason for it in more detail later. Right now, let me just say
this: If you are able to stay alert and present at that time and watch whatever you feel within,
rather than be taken over by it, it affords an opportunity for the most powerful spiritual
practice, and a rapid transmutation of all past pain becomes possible.
EGO IDENTIFICATION WITH THE PAIN-BODY

The process that I have just described is profoundly powerful yet simple. It could be taught to
a child, and hopefully one day it will be one of the first things children learn in school. Once
you have understood the basic principle of being present as the watcher of what happens
inside you - and you "understand" it by experiencing it - you have at your disposal the most
potent transformational tool.
This is not to deny that you may encounter intense inner resistance to disidentifying from
your pain. This will be the case particularly if you have lived closely identified with your
emotional pain-body for most of your life and the whole or a large part of your sense of self
is invested in it. What this means is that you have made an unhappy self out of your painbody and believe that this mind-made fiction is who you are. In that case, unconscious fear of
losing your identity will create strong resistance to any disidentification. In other words, you
would rather be in pain - be the pain-body - than take a leap into the unknown and risk losing
the familiar unhappy self.
If this applies to you, observe the resistance within yourself. Observe the attachment to
your pain. Be very alert. Observe the peculiar pleasure you derive from being unhappy.
Observe the compulsion to talk or think about it. The resistance will cease if you make it conscious. You can then take your attention into the pain-body, stay present as the witness, and
so initiate its transmutation.
Only you can do this. Nobody can do it for you. But if you are fortunate enough to find
someone who is intensely conscious, if you can be with them and join them in the state of
presence, that can be helpful and will accelerate things. In this way, your own light will
quickly grow stronger. When a log that has only just started to burn is placed next to one that
is burning fiercely, and after a while they are separated again, the first log will be burning
with much greater intensity. After all, it is the same fire. To be such a fire is one of the
functions of a spiritual teacher. Some therapists may also be able to fulfill that function,
provided that they have gone beyond the level of mind and can create and sustain a state of
intense conscious presence while they are working with you.
THE ORIGIN OF FEAR

You mentioned fear as being part of our basic underlying emotional pain. How does fear arise,
and why is there so much of it in people's lives? And isn't a certain amount of fear just healthy
self-protection? If I didn't have a fear of fire, I might put my hand in it and get burned.

The reason why you don't put your hand in the fire is not because of fear, ifs because you
know that you'll get burned. You don't need fear to avoid unnecessary danger - just a
minimum of intelligence and common sense. For such practical matters, it is useful to apply
the lessons learned in the past. Now if someone threatened you with fire or with physical
violence, you might experience something like fear. This is an instinctive shrinking back
from danger, but not the psychological condition of fear that we are talking about here. The
psychological condition of fear is divorced from any concrete and true immediate danger. It
comes in many forms: unease, worry, anxiety, nervousness, tension, dread, phobia, and so
on. This kind of psychological fear is always of something that might happen, not of something that is happening now. You are in the here and now, while your mind is in the future.
This creates an anxiety gap. And if you are identified with your mind and have lost touch
with the power and simplicity of the Now, that anxiety gap will be your constant companion.
You can always cope with the present moment, but you cannot cope with something that is
only a mind projection - you cannot cope with the future.
Moreover, as long as you are identified with your mind, the ego runs your life, as I
pointed out earlier. Because of its phantom nature, and despite elaborate defense
mechanisms, the ego is very vulnerable and insecure, and it sees itself as constantly under
threat. This, by the way, is the case even, if the ego is outwardly very confident. Now
remember that an emotion is the body's reaction to your mind. What message is the body
receiving continuously from the ego, the false, mind-made self? Danger, I am under threat. And
what is the emotion generated by this continuous message? Fear, of course.
Fear seems to have many causes. Fear of loss, fear of failure, fear of being hurt, and so on,
but ultimately all fear is the ego's fear of death, of annihilation. To the ego, death is always just
around the corner. In this mind-identified state, fear of death affects every aspect of your life. For
example, even such a seemingly trivial and "normal" thing as the compulsive need to be right in
an argument and make the other person wrong - defending the mental position with which you
have identified - is due to the fear of death. If you identify with a mental position, then if you are
wrong, your mind-based sense of self is seriously threatened with annihilation. So you as the ego
cannot afford to be wrong. To be wrong is to die. Wars have been fought over this, and countless
relationships have broken down.
Once you have disidentified from your mind, whether you are right or wrong makes no
difference to your sense of self at all, so the forcefully compulsive and deeply unconscious need
to be right, which is a form of violence, will no longer be there. You can state dearly and firmly
how you feel or what you think, but there will be no aggressiveness or defensiveness about it.
Your sense of self is then derived from a deeper and truer place within yourself, not from the
mind. Watch out for any kind of defensiveness within yourself. What are you defending? An
illusory identity, an image in your mind, a fictitious entity. By making this pattern conscious, by
witnessing it, you disidentify from it. In the light of your consciousness, the unconscious pattern
will then quickly dissolve. This is the end of all arguments and power games, which are so
corrosive to relationships. Power over others is weakness disguised as strength. True power is
within, and it is available to you now.
So anyone who is identified with their mind and, therefore, disconnected from their true
power, their deeper self rooted in Being, will have fear as their constant companion. The number
of people who have gone beyond mind is as yet extremely small, so you can assume that virtually
everyone you meet or know lives in a state of fear. Only the intensity of it varies. It fluctuates
between anxiety and dread at one end of the scale and a vague unease and distant sense of threat
at the other. Most people become conscious of it only when it takes on one of its more acute
forms.
THE EGO'S SEARCH FOR WHOLENESS

Another aspect of the emotional pain that is an intrinsic part of the egoic mind is a deep-seated
sense of lack or incompleteness, of not being whole. In some people, this is conscious, in others
unconscious. If it is conscious, it manifests as the unsettling and constant feeling of not being
worthy or good enough. If it is unconscious, it will only be felt indirectly as an intense craving,
wanting and needing. In either case, people will often enter into a compulsive pursuit of egogratification and things to identify with in order to fill this hole they feel within. So they strive
after possessions, money, success, power, recognition, or a special relationship, basically so that
they can feel better about themselves, feel more complete. But even when they attain all these
things, they soon find that the hole is still there, that it is bottomless. Then they are really in
trouble, because they cannot delude themselves anymore. Well, they can and do, but it gets more
difficult.
As long as the egoic mind is running your life, you cannot truly be at ease; you cannot be at
peace or fulfilled except for brief intervals when you obtained what you wanted, when a craving
has just been fulfilled. Since the ego is a derived sense of self, it needs to identify with external
things. It needs to be both defended and fed constantly. The most common ego identifications
have to do with possessions, the work you do, social status and recognition, knowledge and education, physical appearance, special abilities, relationships, personal and family history, belief
systems, and often also political, nationalistic, racial, religious, and other collective
identifications. None of these is you.
Do you find this frightening? Or is it a relief to know this? All of these things you will have
to relinquish sooner or later. Perhaps you find it as yet hard to believe, and I am certainly not
asking you to believe that your identity cannot be found in any of those things. You will know the
truth of it for yourself. You will know it at the latest when you feel death approaching. Death is a
stripping away of all that is not you. The secret of life is to "die before you die" - and find that
there is no death.
MOVING DEEPLY INTO
THE NOW
DON'T SEEK YOUR SELF IN THE MIND
I feel that there is still a great deal I need to learn about the workings of my mind before I can
get anywhere near full consciousness or spiritual enlightenment.
No, you don't. The problems of the mind cannot be solved on the level of the mind. Once you
have understood the basic dysfunction, there isn't really much else that you need to learn or
understand. Studying the complexities of the mind may make you a good psychologist, but doing
so won't take you beyond the mind, just as the study of madness isn't enough to create sanity.
You have already understood the basic mechanics of the unconscious state: identification with
the mind, which creates a false self, the ego, as a substitute for your true self rooted in Being.
You become as a "branch cut off from the vine," as Jesus puts it.
The ego's needs are endless. It feels vulnerable and threatened and so lives in a state of fear
and want. Once you know how the basic dysfunction operates, there is no need to explore all its
countless manifestations, no need to make it into a complex personal problem. The ego, of
course, loves that. It is always seeking for something to attach itself to in order to uphold and
strengthen its illusory sense of self, and it will readily attach itself to your problems. This is why,
for so many people, a large part of their sense of self is intimately connected with their problems.
Once this has happened, the last thing they want is to become free of them; that would mean loss
of self. There can be a great deal of unconscious ego investment in pain and suffering.
So once you recognize the root of unconsciousness as identification with the mind, which of
course includes the emotions, you step out of it. You become present. When you are present, you
can allow the mind to be as it is without getting entangled in it. The mind in itself is not
dysfunctional. It is a wonderful tool. Dysfunction sets in when you seek your self in it and
mistake it for who you are. It then becomes the egoic mind and takes over your whole life.
END THE DELUSION OF TIME

It seems almost impossible to disidentify from the mind. We are all immersed in it. How do you
teach a fish to fly?
Here is the key. End the delusion of time. Time and mind are inseparable. Remove time from the
mind and it stops - unless you choose to use it.
To be identified with your mind is to be trapped in time: the compulsion to live almost
exclusively through memory and anticipation. This creates an endless preoccupation with past
and future and an unwillingness to honor and acknowledge the present moment and allow it to
be. The compulsion arises because the past gives you an identity and the future holds the promise
of salvation, of fulfillment in whatever form. Both are illusions.
But without a sense of time, how would we function in this world? There would be no goals to
strive toward anymore. I wouldn't even know who I am, because my past makes me who I am
today. I think time is something very precious, and we need to learn to use it wisely rather than
waste it.
Time isn't precious at all, because it is an illusion. What you perceive as precious is not time but
the one point that is out of time: the Now. That is precious indeed. The more you are focused on
time - past and future - the more you miss the Now, the most precious thing there is.
Why is it the most precious thing? Firstly, because it is the only thing. It's all there is. The
eternal present is the space within which your whole life unfolds, the one factor that remains
constant. Life is now. There was never a time when your life was not now, nor will there ever be.
Secondly, the Now is the only point that can take you beyond the limited confines of the mind. It
is your only point of access into the timeless and formless realm of Being.

§
NOTHING EXISTS OUTSIDE THE NOW

Aren't past and future just as real, sometimes even more real, than the present? After all, the
past determines who we are, as well as how we perceive and behave in the present. And our
future goals determine which actions we take in the present.
You haven't yet grasped the essence of what I am saying because you are trying to understand it
mentally. The mind cannot understand this. Only you can. Please just listen.
Have you ever experienced, done, thought, or felt anything outside the Now? Do you think
you ever will? Is it possible for anything to happen or be outside the Now? The answer is
obvious, is it not?
Nothing ever happened in the past; it happened in the Now.
Nothing will ever happen in the future; it will happen in the Now.

What you think of as the past is a memory trace, stored in the mind, of a former Now.
When you remember the past, you reactivate a memory trace - and you do so now. The
future is an imagined Now, a projection of the mind. When the future comes, it comes as
the Now. When you think about the future, you do it now. Past and future obviously have
no reality of their own. Just as the moon has no light of its own, but can only reflect the
light of the sun, so are past and future only pale reflections of the light, power, and reality
of the eternal present. Their reality is "borrowed" from the Now.
The essence of what I am saying here cannot be understood by the mind. The
moment you grasp it, there is a shift in consciousness from mind to Being, from time to
presence. Suddenly, everything feels alive, radiates energy, emanates Being.

§
THE KEY TO THE SPIRITUAL DIMENSION

In life-threatening emergency situations, the shift in consciousness from time to presence
sometimes happens naturally. The personality that has a past and a future momentarily
recedes and is replaced by an intense conscious presence, very still but very alert at the same
time. Whatever response is needed then arises out of that state of consciousness.
The reason why some people love to engage in dangerous activities, such as mountain
climbing, car racing, and so on, although they may not be aware of it, is that it forces them
into the Now - that intensely alive state that is free of time, free of problems, free of thinking,
free of the burden of the personality. Slipping away from the present moment even for a
second may mean death. Unfortunately, they come to depend on a particular activity to be in
that state. But you don't need to climb the north face of the Eiger. You can enter that state
now.

§
Since ancient times, spiritual masters of all traditions have pointed to the Now as the key to
the spiritual dimension. Despite this, it seems to have remained a secret. It is certainly not
taught in churches and temples. If you go to a church, you may hear readings from the
Gospels such as "Take no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the
things of itself," or "Nobody who puts his hands to the plow and looks back is fit for the
Kingdom of God." Or you might hear the passage about the beautiful flowers that are not
anxious about tomorrow but live with ease in the timeless Now and are provided for
abundantly by God. The depth and radical nature of these teachings are not recognized. No
one seems to realize that they are meant to be lived and so bring about a profound inner
transformation.

§
The whole essence of Zen consists in walking along the razor's edge of Now - to be so
utterly, so completely present that no problem, no suffering, nothing that is not who you are in
your essence, can survive in you. In the Now, in the absence of time, all your problems dissolve. Suffering needs time; it cannot survive in the Now.
The great Zen master Rinzai, in order to take his students' attention away from time,
would often raise his finger and slowly ask: "What, at this moment, is lacking?" A powerful
question that does not require an answer on the level of the mind. It is designed to take your
attention deeply into the Now. A similar question in the Zen tradition is this: "If not now,
when?"

§
The Now is also central to the teaching of Sufism, the mystical branch of Islam. Sufis have a
saying: "The Sufi is the son of time present." And Rumi, the great poet and teacher of Sufism,
declares: "Past and future veil God from our sight; burn up both of them with fire."
Meister Eckhart, the thirteenth-century spiritual teacher, summed it all up beautifully.
"Time is what keeps the light from reaching us. There is no greater obstacle to God than
time."

§
ACCESSING THE POWER OF THE NOW

A moment ago, when you talked about the eternal present and the unreality of past and future, I
found myself looking at that tree outside the window. I had looked at it a few times before, but this
time it was different. The external perception had not changed much, except that the colors seemed
brighter and more vibrant. But there was now an added dimension to it. This is hard to explain. I
don't know how, but I was aware of something invisible that I felt was the essence of that tree, its
inner spirit, if you like. And somehow I was part of that. I realize now that I hadn't truly seen the
tree before, just a flat and dead image of it. When I look at the tree now, some of that awareness is
still present, but I can feel it slipping away. You see, the experience is already receding into the past.
Can something like this ever be more than a fleeting glimpse?

You were free of time for a moment. You moved into the Now and therefore perceived the
tree without the screen of mind. The awareness of Being became part of your perception.
With the timeless dimension comes a different kind of knowing, one that does not "kill" the
spirit that lives within every creature and every thing. A knowing that does not destroy the
sacredness and mystery of life but contains a deep love and reverence for all that is. A
knowing of which the mind knows nothing.
The mind cannot know the tree. It can only know facts or information about the tree.
My mind cannot know you, only labels, judgments, facts, and opinions about you. Being
alone knows directly.
There is a place for mind and mind knowledge. It is in the practical realm of day-to-day
living. However, when it takes over all aspects of your life, including your relationships with
other human beings and with nature, it becomes a monstrous parasite that, unchecked, may
well end up killing all life on the planet and finally itself by killing its host.
You have had a glimpse of how the timeless can transform your perceptions. But an
experience is not enough, no matter how beautiful or profound. What is needed and what
we are concerned with is a permanent shift in consciousness.
So break the old pattern of present-moment denial and present moment resistance.
Make it your practice to withdraw attention from past and future whenever they are not
needed. Step out of the time dimension as much as possible in everyday life. If you find it
hard to enter the Now directly, start by observing the habitual tendency of your mind to
want to escape from the Now. You will observe that the future is usually imagined as
either better or worse than the present. If the imagined future is better, it gives you hope
or pleasurable anticipation. If it is worse, it creates anxiety. Both are illusory. Through
self-observation, more presence comes into your life automatically. The moment you
realize you are not present, you are present. Whenever you are able to observe your mind,
you are no longer trapped in it. Another factor has come in, something that is not of the
mind: the witnessing presence.
Be present as the watcher of your mind – of your thoughts and emotions as well as
your reactions in various situations. Be at least as interested in your reactions as in the
situation or person that causes you to react. Notice also how often your attention is in the
past or future. Don’t judge or analyze what you observe. Watch the thought, feel the
emotion, observe the reaction. Don't make a personal problem out of them. You will then feel
something more powerful than any of those things that you observe: the still, observing
presence itself behind the content of your mind, the silent watcher.

§
Intense presence is needed when certain situations trigger a reaction with a strong emotional
charge, such as when your self-image is threatened, a challenge comes into your life that
triggers fear, things "go wrong," or an emotional complex from the past is brought up. In
those instances, the tendency is for you to become "unconscious." The reaction or emotion
takes you over - you "become" it. You act it out. You justify, make wrong, attack, defend ...
except that it isn't you, ifs the reactive pattern, the mind in its habitual survival mode.
Identification with the mind gives it more energy, observation of the mind withdraws
energy from it. Identification with the mind creates more time; observation of the mind opens
up the dimension of the timeless. The energy that is withdrawn from the mind turns into
presence. Once you can feel what it means to be present, it becomes much easier to simply
choose to step out of the time dimension whenever time is not needed for practical purposes
and move more deeply into the Now. This does not impair your ability to use time - past or
future - when you need to refer to it for practical matters. Nor does it impair your ability to
use your mind. In fact, it enhances it. When you do use your mind, it will be sharper, more
focused.
LETTING GO OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TIME

Learn to use time in the practical aspects of your life - we may call this "clock time" - but
immediately return to present-moment awareness when those practical matters have been
dealt with. In this way, there will be no build-up of "psychological time," which is identification with the past and continuous compulsive projection into the future.
Clock time is not just making an appointment or planning a trip. It includes learning from
the past so that we don't repeat the same mistakes over and over. Setting goals and working
toward them. Predicting the future by means of patterns and laws, physical, mathematical and
so on, learned from the past and taking appropriate action on the basis of our predictions.
But even here, within the sphere of practical living, where we cannot do without
reference to past and future, the present moment remains the essential factor. Any lesson from
the past becomes relevant and is applied now. Any planning as well as working toward
achieving a particular goal is done now.
The enlightened persons main focus of attention is always the Now, but they are still
peripherally aware of time. In other words, they continue to use clock time but are free of
psychological time.
Be alert as you practice this so that you do not unwittingly transform clock time into
psychological time. For example, if you made a mistake in the past and learn from it now,
you are using clock time. On the other hand, if you dwell on it mentally, and self-criticism,
remorse, or guilt come up, then you are making the mistake into "me" and "mine": you make
it part of your sense of self, and it has become psychological time, which is always linked to
a false sense of identity. Nonforgiveness necessarily implies a heavy burden of psychological
time.
If you set yourself a goal and work toward it, you are using clock time. You are aware of
where you want to go, but you honor and give your fullest attention to the step that you are
taking at this moment. If you then become excessively focused on the goal, perhaps because
you are seeking happiness, fulfillment, or a more complete sense of self in it, the Now is no
longer honored. It becomes reduced to a mere stepping stone to the future, with no intrinsic
value. Clock time then turns into psychological time. Your life's journey is no longer an
adventure, just an obsessive need to arrive, to attain, to "make it." You no longer see or smell
the flowers by the wayside either, nor are you aware of the beauty and the miracle of life that
unfolds all around you when you are present in the Now.
§
I can see the supreme importance of the Now, but I cannot quite go along with you when you say
that time is a complete illusion.

When I say "time is an illusion," my intention is not to make a philosophical statement. I am
just reminding you of a simple fact - a fact so obvious that you may find it hard to grasp and
may even find it meaningless - but once fully realized, it can cut like a sword through all the
mind-created layers of complexity and "problems." Let me say it again: the present moment
is all you ever have. There is never a time when your life is not "this moment." Is this not a
fact?
THE INSANITY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TIME

You will not have any doubt that psychological time is a mental disease if you look at its
collective manifestations. They occur, for example, in the form of ideologies such as
communism, national socialism or any nationalism, or rigid religious belief systems, which
operate under the implicit assumption that the highest good lies in the future and that
therefore the end justifies the means. The end is an idea, a point in the mind-projected future,
when salvation in whatever form - happiness, fulfillment, equality, liberation, and so on - will
be attained. Not infrequently, the means of getting there are the enslavement, torture, and
murder of people in the present.
For example, it is estimated that as many as 5o million people were murdered to further
the cause of communism, to bring about a "better world" in Russia, China, and other
countries. This is a chilling example of how belief in a future heaven creates a present hell.
Can there be any doubt that psychological time is a serious and dangerous mental illness?
How does this mind pattern operate in your life? Are you always trying to get
somewhere other than where you are? Is most of your doing just a means to an end? Is
fulfillment always just around the corner or confined to short-lived pleasures, such as sex,
food, drink, drugs, or thrills and excitement? Are you always focused on becoming,
achieving, and attaining, or alternatively chasing some new thrill or pleasure? Do you
believe that if you acquire more things you will become more fulfilled, good enough, or
psychologically complete? Are you waiting for a man or woman to give meaning to your
life?
In the normal, mind-identified or unenlightened state of consciousness, the power and
infinite creative potential that lie concealed in the Now are completely obscured by
psychological time. Your life then loses its vibrancy, its freshness, its sense of wonder. The
old patterns of thought, emotion, behavior, reaction, and desire are acted out in endless
repeat performances, a script in your mind that gives you an identity of sorts but distorts or
covers up the reality of the Now. The mind then creates an obsession with the future as an
escape from the unsatisfactory present.
NEGATIVITY AND SUFFERING HAVE THEIR ROOTS IN TIME

But the belief that the future will be better than the present is not always an illusion. The present
can be dreadful, and things can get better in the future, and often they do.
Usually, the future is a replica of the past. Superficial changes are possible, but real
transformation is rare and depends upon whether you can become present enough to
dissolve the past by accessing the power of the Now. What you perceive as future is an
intrinsic part of your state of consciousness now. If your mind carries a heavy burden of
past, you will experience more of the same. The past perpetuates itself through lack of
presence. The quality of your consciousness at this moment is what shapes the future which, of course, can only be experienced as the Now.
You may win $10 million, but that kind of change is no more than skin deep. You would
simply continue to act out the same conditioned patterns in more luxurious surroundings.
Humans have learned to split the atom. Instead of killing ten or twenty people with a wooden
club, one person can now kill a million just by pushing a button. Is that real change?
If it is the quality of your consciousness at this moment that determines the future, then
what is it that determines the quality of your consciousness? Your degree of presence. So the
only place where true change can occur and where the past can be dissolved is the Now.

§
All negativity is caused by an accumulation of psychological time and denial of the present.
Unease, anxiety, tension, stress, worry - all forms of fear - are caused by too much future, and
not enough presence. Guilt, regret, resentment, grievances, sadness, bitterness, and all forms
of nonforgiveness are caused by too much past, and not enough presence.
Most people find it difficult to believe that a state of consciousness totally free of all
negativity is possible. And yet this is the liberated state to which all spiritual teachings point.
It is the promise of salvation, not in an illusory future but right here and now.
You may find it hard to recognize that time is the cause of your suffering or your
problems. You believe that they are caused by specific situations in your life, and seen from a
conventional viewpoint, this is true. But until you have dealt with the basic problem-making
dysfunction of the mind - its attachment to past and future and denial of the Now - problems
are actually interchangeable. If all your problems or perceived causes of suffering or
unhappiness were miraculously removed for you today, but you had not become more
present, more conscious, you would soon find yourself with a similar set of problems or
causes of suffering, like a shadow that follows you wherever you go. Ultimately, there is only
one problem: the timebound mind itself.
I cannot believe that I could ever reach a point where I am completely free of my problems.

You are right. You can never reach that point because you are at that point now.
There is no salvation in time. You cannot be free in the future. Presence is the key to
freedom, so you can only be free now.
FINDING THE LIFE UNDERNEATH YOUR LIFE SITUATION

I don't see how I can be free now. As it happens, I am extremely unhappy with my life at the
moment. This is a fact, and I would be deluding myself if I tried to convince myself that all is well
when it definitely isn't. To me, the present moment is very unhappy; it is not liberating at all. What
keeps me going is the hope or possibility of some improvement in the future.
You think that your attention is in the present moment when it’s actually taken up completely
by time. You cannot be both unhappy and fully present in the Now.
What you refer to as your "life" should more accurately be called your "life situation." It
is psychological time: past and future. Certain things in the past didn't go the way you wanted
them to go. You are still resisting what happened in the past, and now you are resisting what
is. Hope is what keeps you going, but hope keeps you focused on the future, and this
continued focus perpetuates your denial of the Now and therefore your unhappiness.
It is true that my present life situation is the result of things that happened in the past, but it is still
my present situation, and being stuck in it is what makes me unhappy.

Forget about your life situation for a while and pay attention to your life.
What is the difference?

Your life situation exists in time.
Your life is now.
Your life situation is mind-stuff.
Your life is real.
Find the "narrow gate that leads to life." It is called the Now. Narrow your life down to
this moment. Your life situation may be full of problems - most life situations are - but find
out if you have any problem at this moment. Not tomorrow or in ten minutes, but now. Do
you have a problem now?
When you are full of problems, there is no room for anything new to enter, no room for a
solution. So whenever you can, make some room, create some space, so that you find the life
underneath your life situation.
Use your senses fully. Be where you are. Look around. Just look, don't interpret. See the
light, shapes, colors, textures. Be aware of the silent presence of each thing. Be aware of the
space that allows everything to be. Listen to the sounds; don't judge them. Listen to the
silence underneath the sounds. Touch something - anything - and feel and acknowledge its
Being. Observe the rhythm of your breathing; feel the air flowing in and out, feel the life
energy inside your body. Allow everything to be, within and without. Allow the "isness" of all
things. Move deeply into the Now.
You are leaving behind the deadening world of mental abstraction, of time. You are
getting out of the insane mind that is draining you of life energy, just as it is slowly
poisoning and destroying the Earth. You are awakening out of the dream of time into the
present.

§
ALL PROBLEMS ARE ILLUSIONS OF THE MIND

It feels as if a heavy burden has been lifted. A sense of lightness. I feel clear... but my problems are
still there waiting for me, aren't they? They haven't been solved. Am I not just temporarily evading
them?
If you found yourself in paradise, it wouldn't be long before your mind would say "yes,
but...." Ultimately, this is not about solving your problems. It's about realizing that there are
no problems. Only situations - to be dealt with now, or to be left alone and accepted as part of
the "insets" of the present moment until they change or can be dealt with. Problems are mindmade and need time to survive. They cannot survive in the actuality of the Now.
Focus your attention on the Now and tell me what problem you have at this moment.

§
I am not getting any answer because it is impossible to have a problem when your
attention is fully in the Now. A situation that needs to be either dealt with or accepted - yes.
Why make it into a problem? Why make anything into a problem? Isn't life challenging
enough as it is? What do you need problems for? The mind unconsciously loves problems
because they give you an identity of sorts. This is normal, and it is insane. "Problem' means
that you are dwelling on a situation mentally without there being a true intention or
possibility of taking action now and that you are unconsciously making it part of your sense
of self. You become so overwhelmed by your life situation that you lose your sense of life,
of Being. Or you are carrying in your mind the insane burden of a hundred things that you
will or may have to do in the future instead of focusing your attention on the one thing that
you can do now.
When you create a problem, you create pain. All it takes is a simple choice, a simple
decision: no matter what happens, I will create no more pain for myself. I will create no more
problems. Although it is a simple choice, it is also very radical. You won’t make that choice
unless you are truly fed up with suffering, unless you have truly had enough. And you won’t
be able to go through with it unless you access the power of the Now. If you create no more
pain for yourself, then you create no more pain for others. You also no longer contaminate the
beautiful Earth, your inner space, and the collective human psyche with the negativity of
problem-making.

§
If you have ever been in a life-or-death emergency situation, you will know that it wasn't a

problem. The mind didn't have time to fool around and make it into a problem. In a true
emergency, the mind stops; you become totally present in the Now, and something infinitely
more powerful takes over. This is why there are many reports of ordinary people suddenly
becoming capable of incredibly courageous deeds. In any emergency, either you survive or
you don't. Either way, it is not a problem.
Some people get angry when they hear me say that problems are illusions. I am
threatening to take away their sense of who they are. They have invested much time in a false
sense of self. For many years, they have unconsciously defined their whole identity in terms
of their problems or their suffering. Who would they be without it?
A great deal of what people say, think, or do is actually motivated by fear, which of
course is always linked with having your focus on the future and being out of touch with the
Now. As there are no problems in the Now, there is no fear either.
Should a situation arise that you need to deal with now, your action will be clear and
incisive if it arises out of present-moment awareness. It is also more likely to be effective. It
will not be a reaction coming from the past conditioning of your mind but an intuitive
response to the situation. In other instances, when the time-bound mind would have reacted,
you will find it more effective to do nothing - just stay centered in the Now.
A QUANTUM LEAP IN THE EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS

I have had glimpses of this state of freedom from mind and time that you describe, but past and
future are so overwhelmingly strong that I cannot keep them out for long.

The time-bound mode of consciousness is deeply embedded in the human psyche. But what
we are doing here is part of a profound transformation that is taking place in the collective
consciousness of the planet and beyond: the awakening of consciousness from the dream of
matter, form, and separation. The ending of time. We are breaking mind patterns that have
dominated human life for eons. Mind patterns that have created unimaginable suffering on a
vast scale. I am not using the word evil. It is more helpful to call it unconsciousness or
insanity.
This breaking up of the old mode of consciousness or rather unconsciousness: is it something we
have to do or will it happen anyway? I mean, is this change inevitable?

That's a question of perspective. The doing and the happening is in fact a single process;
because you are one with the totality of consciousness, you cannot separate the two. But there
is no absolute guarantee that humans will make it. The process isn't inevitable or automatic.
Your cooperation is an essential part of it. However you look at it, it is a quantum leap in the
evolution of consciousness, as well as our only chance of survival as a race.
THE JOY OF BEING

To alert you that you have allowed yourself to be taken over by psychological time, you can
use a simple criterion. Ask yourself: Is there joy, ease, and lightness in what I am doing? If
there isn't, then time is covering up the present moment, and life is perceived as a burden or a
struggle.
If there is no joy, ease, or lightness in what you are doing, it does not necessarily mean
that you need to change what you are doing. It may be sufficient to change the how. "How" is
always more important than "what." See if you can give much more attention to the doing
than to the result that you want to achieve through it. Give your fullest attention to whatever
the moment presents. This implies that you also completely accept what is, because you
cannot give your full attention to something and at the same time resist it.
As soon as you honor the present moment, all unhappiness and struggle dissolve, and life
begins to flow with joy and ease. When you act out of present-moment awareness, whatever
you do becomes imbued with a sense of quality, care, and love - even the most simple action.

§
So do not be concerned with the fruit of your action - just give attention to the action itself.
The fruit will come of its own accord. This is a powerful spiritual practice. In the Bhagavad
Gita, one of the oldest and most beautiful spiritual teachings in existence, non-attachment to
the fruit of your action is called Karma Yoga. It is described as the path of "consecrated
action."
When the compulsive striving away from the Now ceases, the joy of Being flows into
everything you do. The moment your attention turns to the Now, you feel a presence, a
stillness, a peace. You no longer depend on the future for fulfillment and satisfaction - you
don't look to it for salvation. Therefore, you are not attached to the results. Neither failure nor
success has the power to change your inner state of Being. You have found the life
underneath your life situation.
In the absence of psychological time, your sense of self is derived from Being, not from
your personal past. Therefore, the psychological need to become anything other than who
you are already is no longer there. In the world, on the level of your life situation, you may
indeed become wealthy, knowledgeable, successful, free of this or that, but in the deeper
dimension of Being you are complete and whole now.
In that state of wholeness, would we still be able or willing to pursue external goals?

Of course, but you will not have illusory expectations that anything or anybody in the future
will save you or make you happy. As far as your life situation is concerned, there may be
things to be attained or acquired. That's the world of form, of gain and loss. Yet on a deeper
level you are already complete, and when you realize that, there is a playful, joyous energy
behind what you do. Being free of psychological time, you no longer pursue your goals with
grim determination, driven by fear, anger, discontent, or the need to become someone. Nor
will you remain inactive through fear of failure, which to the ego is loss of self. When your
deeper sense of self is derived from Being, when you are free of "becoming" as a
psychological need, neither your happiness nor your sense of self depends on the outcome,
and so there is freedom from fear. You don't seek permanency where it cannot be found: in
the world of form, of gain and loss, birth and death. You don't demand that situations,
conditions, places, or people should make you happy, and then suffer when they don't live up
to your expectations.
Everything is honored, but nothing matters. Forms are born and die, yet you are aware of
the eternal underneath the forms. You know that "nothing real can be threatened."
When this is your state of Being, how can you not succeed? You have succeeded already.

MIND STRATEGIES FOR
AVOIDING THE NOW
LOSS OF NOW: THE CORE DELUSION
Even if I completely accept that ultimately time is an illusion, what difference is that going
to make in my life? I still have to live in a world that is completely dominated by time.
Intellectual agreement is just another belief and won’t make much difference to your life. To
realize this truth, you need to live it. When every cell of your body is so present that it feels
vibrant with life, and when you can feel that life every moment as the joy of Being, then it
can be said that you are free of time.
But I still have to pay the bills tomorrow, and I am still going to grow old and die just like
everybody else. So how can I ever say that I am free of time?
Tomorrow's bills are not the problem. The dissolution of the physical body is not a problem.
Loss of Now is the problem, or rather the core delusion that turns a mere situation, event, or
emotion into a personal problem and into suffering. Loss of Now is loss of Being.
To be free of time is to be free of the psychological need of past for your identity and
future for your fulfillment. It represents the most profound transformation of consciousness
that you can imagine. In some rare cases, this shift in consciousness happens dramatically
and radically, once and for all. When it does, it usually comes about through total surrender in
the midst of intense suffering. Most people, however, have to work at it.
When you have had your first few glimpses of the timeless state of consciousness, you begin
to move back and forth between the dimensions of time and presence. First you become aware of
just how rarely your attention is truly in the Now. But to know that you are not present is a great
success: that knowing is presence - even if initially it only lasts for a couple of seconds of clock
time before it is lost again. Then, with increasing frequency, you choose to have the focus of your
consciousness in the present moment rather than in the past or future, and whenever you realize
that you had lost the Now, you are able to stay in it not just for a couple of seconds, but for longer
periods as perceived from the external perspective of clock time. So before you are firmly
established in the state of presence, which is to say before you are fully conscious, you shift back
and forth for a while between consciousness and unconsciousness, between the state of presence
and the state of mind identification. You lose the Now, and you return to it, again and again.
Eventually, presence becomes your predominant state.
For most people, presence is experienced either never at all or only accidentally and briefly
on rare occasions without being recognized for what it is. Most humans alternate not between
consciousness and unconsciousness but only between different levels of unconsciousness.
ORDINARY UNCONSCIOUSNESS AND DEEP UNCONSCIOUSNESS

What do you mean by different levels of unconsciousness?
As you probably know, in sleep you constantly move between the phases of dreamless sleep and
the dream state. Similarly, in wakefulness most people only shift between ordinary
unconsciousness and deep unconsciousness. What I call ordinary unconsciousness means being
identified with your thought processes and emotions, your reactions, desires, and aversions. It is
most people's normal state. In that state, you are run by the egoic mind, and you are unaware of
Being. It is a state not of acute pain or unhappiness but of an almost continuous low level of
unease, discontent, boredom, or nervousness - a kind of background static. You may not realize
this because it is so much a part of "normal" living, just as you are not aware of a continuous low
background noise, such as the hum of an air conditioner, until it stops. When it suddenly does
stop, there is a sense of relief. Many people use alcohol, drugs, sex, food, work, television, or
even shopping as anesthetics in an unconscious attempt to remove the basic unease. When this
happens, an activity that might be very enjoyable if used in moderation becomes imbued with a
compulsive or addictive quality, and all that is ever achieved through it is extremely short-lived
symptom relief.
The unease of ordinary unconsciousness turns into the pain of deep unconsciousness - a state
of more acute and more obvious suffering or unhappiness - when things "go wrong," when the
ego is threatened or there is a major challenge, threat, or loss, real or imagined, in your life
situation or conflict in a relationship. It is an intensified version of ordinary unconsciousness,
different from it not in kind but in degree.
In ordinary unconsciousness, habitual resistance to or denial of what is creates the unease
and discontent that most people accept as normal living. When this resistance becomes
intensified through some challenge or threat to the ego, it brings up intense negativity such as
anger, acute fear, aggression, depression, and so on. Deep unconsciousness often means that the
pain-body has been triggered and that you have become identified with it. Physical violence
would be impossible without deep unconsciousness. It can also occur easily whenever and
wherever a crowd of people or even an entire nation generates a negative collective energy field.
The best indicator of your level of consciousness is how you deal with life's challenges when
they come. Through those challenges, an already unconscious person tends to become more
deeply unconscious, and a conscious person more intensely conscious. You can use a
challenge to awaken you, or you can allow it to pull you into even deeper sleep. The dream
of ordinary unconsciousness then turns into a nightmare.
If you cannot be present even in normal circumstances, such as when you are sitting
alone in a room, walking in the woods, or listening to someone, then you certainly won't be
able to stay conscious when something "goes wrong" or you are faced with difficult people or
situations, with loss or the threat of loss. You will be taken over by a reaction, which
ultimately is always some form of fear, and pulled into deep unconsciousness. Those
challenges are your tests. Only the way in which you deal with them will show you and
others where you are at as far as your state of consciousness is concerned, not how long you
can sit with your eyes closed or what visions you see.
So it is essential to bring more consciousness into your life in ordinary situations when
everything is going relatively smoothly. In this way, you grow in presence power. It generates
an energy field in you and around you of a high vibrational frequency. No unconsciousness,
no negativity, no discord or violence can enter that field and survive, just as darkness cannot
survive in the presence of light.
When you learn to be the witness of your thoughts and emotions, which is an essential
part of being present, you may be surprised when you first become aware of the background
"static" of ordinary unconsciousness and realize how rarely, if ever, you are truly at ease
within yourself. On the level of your thinking, you will find a great deal of resistance in the
form of judgment, discontent, and mental projection away from the Now. On the emotional
level, there will be an undercurrent of unease, tension, boredom, or nervousness. Both are
aspects of the mind in its habitual resistance mode.
WHAT ARE THEY SEEKING?

Carl Jung tells in one of his books of a conversation he had with a Native American chief
who pointed out to him that in his perception most white people have tense faces, staring
eyes, and a cruel demeanor. He said: "They are always seeking something. What are they
seeking? The whites always want something. They are always uneasy and restless. We don't
know what they want. We think they are mad."
The undercurrent of constant unease started long before the rise of Western industrial
civilization, of course, but in Western civilization, which now covers almost the entire globe,
including most of the East, it manifests in an unprecedentedly acute form. It was already
there at the time of Jesus, and it was there 600 years before that at the time of Buddha, and
long before that. Why are you always anxious? Jesus asked his disciples. "Can anxious
thought add a single day to your life?" And the Buddha taught that the root of suffering is to
be found in our constant wanting and craving.
Resistance to the Now as a collective dysfunction is intrinsically connected to loss of
awareness of Being and forms the basis of our dehumanized industrial civilization. Freud, by
the way, also recognized the existence of this undercurrent of unease and wrote about it in his
book Civilization and Its Discontents, but he did not recognize the true root of the unease and
failed to realize that freedom from it is possible. This collective dysfunction has created a
very unhappy and extraordinarily violent civilization that has become a threat not only to
itself but also to all life on the planet.
DISSOLVING ORDINARY UNCONSCIOUSNESS

So how can we be free of

this affliction?

Make it conscious. Observe the many ways in which unease, discontent, and tension arise
within you through unnecessary judgment, resistance to what is, and denial of the Now.
Anything unconscious dissolves when you shine the light of consciousness on it. Once you
know how to dissolve ordinary unconsciousness, the light of your presence will shine
brightly, and it will be much easier to deal with deep unconsciousness whenever you feel its
gravitational pull. However, ordinary unconsciousness may not be easy to detect initially
because it is so normal.
Make it a habit to monitor your mental-emotional state through self-observation. "Am I
at ease at this moment?" is a good question to ask yourself frequently. Or you can ask:
"What's going on inside me at this moment?" Be at least as interested in what goes on inside
you as what happens outside. If you get the inside right, the outside will fall into place.
Primary reality is within, secondary reality without. But don't answer these questions
immediately. Direct your attention inward. Have a look inside yourself. What kind of
thoughts is your mind producing? What do you feel? Direct your attention into the body. Is
there any tension? Once you detect that there is a low level of unease, the background static,
see in what way you are avoiding, resisting, or denying life - by denying the Now. There are
many ways in which people unconsciously resist the present moment. I will give you a few
examples. With practice, your power of self-observation, of monitoring your inner state, will
become sharpened.
FREEDOM FROM UNHAPPINESS

Do you resent doing what you are doing? It may be your job, or you may have agreed to do
something and are doing it, but part of you resents and resists it. Are you carrying unspoken
resentment toward a person close to you? Do you realize that the energy you thus emanate is
so harmful in its effects that you are in fact contaminating yourself as well as those around
you? Have a good look inside. Is there even the slightest trace of resentment, unwillingness?
If there is, observe it on both the mental and the emotional levels. What thoughts is your
mind creating around this situation? Then look at the emotion, which is the body's reaction
to those thoughts. Feel the emotion. Does it feel pleasant or unpleasant? Is it an energy that
you would actually choose to have inside you? Do you have a choice?
Maybe you are being taken advantage of, maybe the activity you are engaged in is
tedious, maybe someone close to you is dishonest, irritating, or unconscious, but all this is
irrelevant. Whether your thoughts and emotions about this situation are justified or not
makes no difference. The fact is that you are resisting what is. You are making the present
moment into an enemy. You are creating unhappiness, conflict between the inner and the
outer. Your unhappiness is polluting not only your own inner being and those around you but
also the collective human psyche of which you are an inseparable part. The pollution of the
planet is only an outward reflection of an inner psychic pollution: millions of unconscious
individuals not taking responsibility for their inner space.
Either stop doing what you are doing, speak to the person concerned and express fully
what you feel, or drop the negativity that your mind has created around the situation and that
serves no purpose whatsoever except to strengthen a false sense of self. Recognizing its
futility is important. Negativity is never the optimum way of dealing with any situation. In
fact, in most cases it keeps you stuck in it, blocking real change. Anything that is done with
negative energy will become contaminated by it and in time give rise to more pain, more
unhappiness. Furthermore, any negative inner state is contagious: Unhappiness spreads more
easily than a physical disease. Through the law of resonance, it triggers and feeds latent
negativity in others, unless they are immune - that is, highly conscious.
Are you polluting the world or cleaning up the mess? You are responsible for your inner
space; nobody else is, just as you are responsible for the planet. As within, so without: If
humans clear inner pollution, then they will also cease to create outer pollution.
How can we drop negativity, as you suggest?
By dropping it. How do you drop a piece of hot coal that you are holding in your hand? How
do you drop some heavy and useless baggage that you are carrying? By recognizing that you
don't want to suffer the pain or carry the burden anymore and then letting go of it.
Deep unconsciousness, such as the pain-body, or other deep pain, such as the loss of a
loved one, usually needs to be transmuted through acceptance combined with the light of
your presence - your sustained attention. Many patterns in ordinary unconsciousness, on the
other hand, can simply be dropped once you know that you don't want them and don't need
them anymore, once you realize that you have a choice, that you are not just a bundle of
conditioned reflexes. All this implies that you are able to access the power of Now. Without
it, you have no choice.
If you call some emotions negative, aren't you creating a mental polarity of good and bad, as you
explained earlier?

No. The polarity was created at an earlier stage when your mind judged the present moment
as bad; this judgment then created the negative emotion.
But if you call some emotions negative, aren't you really saying that they shouldn't be there, that
it's not okay to have those emotions? My understanding is that we should give ourselves permission
to have whatever feelings come up, rather than judge them as bad or say that we shouldn't have
them. It's okay to feel resentful; it's okay to be angry, irritated, moody, or whatever - otherwise, we
get into repression, inner conflict, or denial. Everything is okay as it is.

Of course. Once a mind pattern, an emotion or a reaction is there, accept it. You were not
conscious enough to have a choice in the matter. That's not a judgment, just a fact. If you had
a choice, or realized that you do have a choice, would you choose suffering or joy, ease or
unease, peace or conflict? Would you choose a thought or feeling that cuts you off from your
natural state of well-being, the joy of life within? Any such feeling I call negative, which
simply means bad. Not in the sense that "You shouldn't have done that'' but just plain factual
bad, like feeling sick in the stomach.
How is it possible that humans killed in excess of 100 million fellow humans in the
twentieth century alone? Humans inflicting pain of such magnitude on one another is beyond
anything you can imagine. And that's not taking into account the mental, emotional and
physical violence, the torture, pain, and cruelty they continue to inflict on each other as well
as on other sentient beings on a daily basis.
Do they act in this way because they are in touch with their natural state, the joy of life
within? Of course not. Only people who are in a deeply negative state, who feel very bad
indeed, would create such a reality as a reflection of how they feel. Now they are engaged in
destroying nature and the planet that sustains them. Unbelievable but true. Humans are a
dangerously insane and very sick species. That's not a judgment. It’s a fact. It is also a fact
that the sanity is there underneath the madness. Healing and redemption are available right
now.
Coming back specifically to what you said - it is certainly true that, when you accept your
resentment, moodiness, anger, and so on, you are no longer forced to act them out blindly,
and you are less likely to project them onto others. But I wonder if you are not deceiving
yourself. When you have been practicing acceptance for a while, as you have, there comes a
point when you need to go on to the next stage, where those negative emotions are not
created anymore. If you don't, your "acceptance" just becomes a mental label that allows your
ego to continue to indulge in unhappiness and so strengthen its sense of separation from other
people, your surroundings, your here and now. As you know, separation is the basis for the
ego's sense of identity. True acceptance would transmute those feelings at once. And if you
really knew deeply that everything is "okay," as you put it, and which of course is true, then
would you have those negative feelings in the first place? Without judgment, without
resistance to what is, they would not arise. You have an idea in your mind that "everything is
okay," but deep down you don't really believe it, and so the old mental-emotional patterns of
resistance are still in place. That's what makes you feel bad. .
That's okay, too.

Are you defending your right to be unconscious, your right to suffer? Don't worry. Nobody is
going to take that away from you. Once you realize that a certain kind of food makes you
sick, would you carry on eating that food and keep asserting that it is okay to be sick?
WHEREVER YOU ARE, BE THERE TOTALLY

Can you give some more examples of ordinary unconsciousness?

See if you can catch yourself complaining, in either speech or thought, about a situation you
find yourself in, what other people do or say, your surroundings, your life situation, even the
weather. To complain is always nonacceptance of what is. It invariably carries an
unconscious negative charge. When you complain, you make yourself into a victim. When
you speak out, you are in your power. So change the situation by taking action or by speaking
out if necessary or possible; leave the situation or accept it. All else is madness.
Ordinary unconsciousness is always linked in some way with denial of the Now. The
Now, of course, also implies the here. Are you resisting your here and now? Some people
would always rather be somewhere else. Their "here" is never good enough. Through selfobservation, find out if that is the case in your life. Wherever you are, be there totally. If you
find your here and now intolerable and it makes you unhappy, you have three options:
remove yourself from the situation, change it, or accept it totally. If you want to take
responsibility for your life, you must choose one of those three options, and you must choose
now. Then accept the consequences. No excuses. No negativity. No psychic pollution. Keep
your inner space clear.
If you take any action - leaving or changing your situation - drop the negativity first, if at
all possible. Action arising out of insight into what is required is more effective than action
arising out of negativity.
Any action is often better than no action, especially if you have been stuck in an unhappy
situation for a long time. If it is a mistake, at least you learn something, in which case it’s no
longer a mistake. If you remain stuck, you learn nothing. Is fear preventing you from taking
action? Acknowledge the fear, watch it, take your attention into it, be fully present with it.
Doing so cuts the link between the fear and your thinking. Don't let the fear rise up into your
mind. Use the power of the Now. Fear cannot prevail against it.
If there is truly nothing that you can do to change your here and now, and you can’t
remove yourself from the situation, then accept your here and now totally by dropping all
inner resistance. The false, unhappy self that loves feeling miserable, resentful, or sorry for
itself can then no longer survive. This is called surrender. Surrender is not weakness. There is
great strength in it. Only a surrendered person has spiritual power. Through surrender, you
will be free internally of the situation. You may then find that the situation changes without
any effort on your part. In any case, you are free.
Or is there something that you "should" be doing but are not doing it? Get up and do it
now. Alternatively, completely accept your inactivity, laziness, or passivity at this moment, if
that is your choice. Go into it fully. Enjoy it. Be as lazy or inactive as you can. If you go into
it fully and consciously, you will soon come out of it. Or maybe you won't. Either way, there
is no inner conflict, no resistance, no negativity.
Are you stressed? Are you so busy getting to the future that the present is reduced to a
means of getting there? Stress is caused by being "here" but wanting to be "there," or being in
the present but wanting to be in the future. If s a split that tears you apart inside. To create
and live with such an inner split is insane. The fact that everyone else is doing it doesn't make
it any less insane. If you have to, you can move fast, work fast, or even run, without
projecting yourself into the future and without resisting the present. As you move, work, run do it totally. Enjoy the flow of energy, the high energy of that moment. Now you are no
longer stressed, no longer splitting yourself in two. Just moving, running, working - and
enjoying it. Or you can drop the whole thing and sit on a park bench. But when you do, watch
your mind. It may say. "You should be working. You are wasting time." Observe the mind.
Smile at it.
Does the past take up a great deal of your attention? Do you frequently talk and think
about it, either positively or negatively? The great things that you have achieved, your
adventures or experiences, or your victim story and the dreadful things that were done to you,
or maybe what you did to someone else? Are your thought processes creating guilt, pride,
resentment, anger, regret, or self-pity? Then you are not only reinforcing a false sense of self
but also helping to accelerate your body's aging process by creating an accumulation of past
in your psyche. Verify this for yourself by observing those around you who have a strong
tendency to hold on to the past.
Die to the past every moment. You don't need it. Only refer to it when it is absolutely
relevant to the present. Feel the power of this moment and the fullness of Being. Feel your
presence.

§
Are you worried? Do you have many "what if" thoughts? You are identified with your mind,
which is projecting itself into an imaginary future situation and creating fear. There is no way
that you can cope with such a situation, because it doesn't exist. It's a mental phantom. You
can stop this health- and life-corroding insanity simply by acknowledging the present
moment. Become aware of your breathing. Feel the air flowing in and out of your body. Feel
your inner energy field. All that you ever have to deal with, cope with, in real life - as
opposed to imaginary mind projections - is this moment. Ask yourself what "problem" you
have right now, not next year, tomorrow, or five minutes from now. What is wrong with this
moment? You can always cope with the Now, but you can never cope with the future - nor do
you have to. The answer, the strength, the right action or the resource will be there when you
need it, not before, not after.
"One day I'll make it." Is your goal taking up so much of your attention that you reduce
the present moment to a means to an end? Is it taking the joy out of your doing? Are you
waiting to start living? If you develop such a mind pattern, no matter what you achieve or
get, the present will never be good enough; the future will always seem better. A perfect
recipe for permanent dissatisfaction and non-fulfillment, don't you agree?
Are you a habitual "waiter"? How much of your life do you, spend waiting? What I call
"small-scale waiting" is waiting in line at the post office, in a traffic jam, at the airport, or
waiting for someone to arrive, to finish work, and so on. "Large-scale waiting" is waiting for
the next vacation, for a better job, for the children to grow up, for a truly meaningful
relationship, for success, to make money, to be important, to become enlightened. It is not
uncommon for people to spend their whole life waiting to start living.
Waiting is a state of mind. Basically, it means that you want the future; you don't want
the present. You don't want what you've got, and you want what you haven't got. With every
kind of waiting, you unconsciously create inner conflict between your here and now, where
you don't want to be, and the projected future, where you want to be. This greatly reduces
the quality of your life by making you lose the present.
There is nothing wrong with striving to improve your life situation. You can improve
your life situation, but you cannot improve your life. Life is primary. Life is your deepest
inner Being. It is already whole, complete, perfect. Your life situation consists of your
circumstances and your experiences. There is nothing wrong with setting goals and striving
to achieve things. The mistake lies in using it as a substitute for the feeling of life, for Being.
The only point of access for that is the Now. You are then like an architect who pays no
attention to the foundation of a building but spends a lot of time working on the
superstructure.
For example, many people are waiting for prosperity. It cannot come in the future.
When you honor, acknowledge, and fully accept your present reality - where you are,
who you are, what you are doing right now - when you fully accept what you have got,
you are grateful for what you have got, grateful for what is, grateful for Being. Gratitude
for the present moment and the fullness of life now is true prosperity. It cannot come in
the future. Then, in time, that prosperity manifests for you in various ways.
If you are dissatisfied with what you have got, or even frustrated or angry about your
present lack, that may motivate you to become rich, but even if you do make millions, you
will continue to experience the inner condition of lack, and deep down you will continue to
feel unfulfilled. You may have many exciting experiences that money can buy, but they will
come and go and always leave you with an empty feeling and the need for further physical or
psychological gratification. You won't abide in Being and so feel the fullness of life now that
alone is true prosperity.
So give up waiting as a state of mind. When you catch yourself slipping into waiting ...
snap out of it. Come into the present moment. Just be, and enjoy being. If you are present,
there is never any need for you to wait for anything. So next time somebody says, "Sorry to
have kept you waiting," you can reply, "That's all right, I wasn't waiting. I was just standing
here enjoying myself - in joy in my self."
These are just a few of the habitual mind strategies for denying the present moment that
are part of ordinary unconsciousness. They are easy to overlook because they are so much a
part of normal living: the background static of perpetual discontent. But the more you practice monitoring your inner mental-emotional state, the easier it will be to know when you
have been trapped in past or future, which is to say unconscious, and to awaken out of the
dream of time into the present. But beware: The false, unhappy self, based on mind
identification, lives on time. It knows that the present moment is its own death and so feels
very threatened by it. It will do all it can to take you out of it. It will try to keep you trapped
in time.
THE INNER PURPOSE OF YOUR LIFE'S JOURNEY

I can see the truth of what you are saying, but I still think that we must have purpose on our life's
journey; otherwise we just drift, and purpose means future, doesn't it? How do we reconcile that
with living in the present?

When you are on a journey, it is certainly helpful to know where you are going or at least the
general direction in which you are moving, but don't forget: the only thing that is ultimately
real about your journey is the step that you are taking at this moment. That's all there ever is.
Your life's journey has an outer purpose and an inner purpose. The outer purpose is to
arrive at your goal or destination, to accomplish what you set out to do, to achieve this or
that, which, of course, implies future. But if your destination, or the steps you are going to
take in the future, take up so much of your attention that they become more important to you
than the step you are taking now, then you completely miss the journeys inner purpose, which
has nothing to do with where you are going or what you are doing, but everything to do with
how. It has nothing to do with future but everything to do with the quality of your
consciousness at this moment. The outer purpose belongs to the horizontal dimension of
space and time; the inner purpose concerns a deepening of your Being in the vertical
dimension of the timeless Now. Your outer journey may contain a million steps; your inner
journey only has one: the step you are taking right now. As you become more deeply aware
of this one step, you realize that it already contains within itself all the other steps as well as
the destination. This one step then becomes transformed into an expression of perfection, an
act of great beauty and quality. It will have taken you into Being, and the light of Being will
shine through it. This is both the purpose and the fulfillment of your inner journey, the
journey into yourself.

§
Does it matter whether we achieve our outer purpose, whether we succeed or fail in the world?

It will matter to you as long as you haven't realized your inner purpose. After that, the outer
purpose is just a game that you may continue to play simply because you enjoy it. It is also
possible to fail completely in your outer purpose and at the same time totally succeed in your
inner purpose. Or the other way around, which is actually more common: outer riches and inner
poverty, or to "gain the world and lose your soul," as Jesus puts it. Ultimately, of course, every
outer purpose is doomed to "fail" sooner or later, simply because it is subject to the law of
impermanence of all things. The sooner you realize that your outer purpose cannot give you
lasting fulfillment, the better. When you have seen the limitations of your outer purpose, you give
up your unrealistic expectation that it should make you happy, and you make it subservient to
your inner purpose.
THE PAST CANNOT SURVIVE IN YOUR PRESENCE

You mentioned that thinking or talking about the past unnecessarily is one of the ways in which we
avoid the present. But apart from the past that we remember and perhaps identify with, isn't there
another level of past within us that is much more deep-seated? I am talking about the unconscious
past that conditions our lives, especially through early childhood experiences, perhaps even pastlife experiences. And then there is our cultural conditioning, which has to do with where we live
geographically and the historical time period in which we live. All these things determine how we
see the world, how we react, what we think, what kind of relationships we have, how we live our
lives. How could we ever become conscious of all that or get rid of it? How long would that take?
And even if we did, what would there be left?

What is left when illusion ends?
There is no need to investigate the unconscious past in you except as it manifests at this
moment as a thought, an emotion, a desire, a reaction, or an external event that happens to you.
Whatever you need to know about the unconscious past in you, the challenges of the present will
bring it out. If you delve into the past, it will become a bottomless pit. There is always more. You
may think that you need more time to understand the past or become free of it, in other words,
that the future will eventually free you of the past. This is a delusion. Only the present can free
you of the past. More time cannot free you of time. Access the power of Now. That is the key.
What is the power of Now?

None other than the power of your presence, your consciousness liberated from thought forms.
So deal with the past on the level of the present. The more attention you give to the past, the
more you energize it, and the more likely you are to make a "self' out of it. Don't misunderstand:
Attention is essential, but not to the past as past. Give attention to the present; give attention to
your behavior, to your reactions, moods, thoughts, emotions, fears, and desires as they occur in
the present. There's the past in you. If you can be present enough to watch all those things, not
critically or analytically but non-judgmentally, then you are dealing with the past and dissolving it
through the power of your presence. You cannot find yourself by going into the past. You find
yourself by coming into the present.
Isn't it helpful to understand the past and so understand why we do certain things, react in certain
ways, or why we unconsciously create our particular kind of drama, patterns in relationships, and
so on?

As you become more conscious of your present reality, you may suddenly get certain
insights as to why your conditioning functions in those particular ways; for example, why
your relationships follow certain patterns, and you may remember things that happened in
the past or see them more clearly. That is fine and can be helpful, but it is not essential. What
is essential is your conscious presence. That dissolves the past. That is the transformative
agent. So don't seek to understand the past, but be as present as you can. The past cannot
survive in your presence. It can only survive in your absence.

Chapter Five

THE STATE OF PRESENCE
IT'S NOT WHAT YOU THINK IT IS

You keep talking about the state of presence as the key. I think I understand it intellectually,
but I don't know if I have ever truly experienced it. I wonder - is it what I think it is, or is it
something entirely different?

It’s not what you think it is! You cant think about presence, and the mind can't understand it.
Understanding presence is being present.
Try a little experiment. Close your eyes and say to yourself: "I wonder what my next
thought is going to be." Then become very alert and wait for the next thought. Be like a cat
watching a mouse hole. What thought is going to come out of the mouse hole? Try it now.

§
Well?
I had to wait for quite a long time before a thought came in.

Exactly. As long as you are in a state of intense presence, you are free of thought. You are
still, yet highly alert. The instant your conscious attention sinks below a certain level, thought
rushes in. The mental noise returns; the stillness is lost. You are back in time.
To test their degree of presence, some Zen masters have been known to creep up on
their students from behind and suddenly hit them with a stick. Quite a shock! If the
student had been fully present and in a state of alertness, if he had "kept his loin girded
and his lamp burning," which is one of the analogies that Jesus uses for presence, he
would have noticed the master coming up from behind and stopped him or stepped aside.
But if he were hit, that would mean he was immersed in thought, which is to say absent,
unconscious.
To stay present in everyday life, it helps to be deeply rooted within yourself;
otherwise, the mind, which has incredible momentum, will drag you along like a wild
river.
What do you mean by "rooted within yourself"?
It means to inhabit your body fully. To always have some of your attention in the inner
energy field of your body. To feel the body from within, so to speak. Body awareness
keeps you present. It anchors you in the Now (see Chapter 6).
THE ESOTERIC MEANING OF "WAITING"
In a sense, the state of presence could be compared to waiting. Jesus used the analogy of
waiting in some of his parables. This is not the usual bored or restless kind of waiting that
is a denial of the present and that I spoke about already. It is not a waiting in which your
attention is focused on some point in the future and the present is perceived as an
undesirable obstacle that prevents you from having what you want. There is a
qualitatively different kind of waiting, one that requires your total alertness. Something
could happen at any moment, and if you are not absolutely awake, absolutely still, you
will miss it. This is the kind of waiting Jesus talks about. In that state, all your attention is
in the Now. There is none left for daydreaming, thinking, remembering, anticipating.
There is no tension in it, no fear, just alert presence. You are present with your whole
Being, with every cell of your body. In that state, the "you" that has a past and a future,
the personality if you like, is hardly there anymore. And yet nothing of value is lost. You
are still essentially yourself. In fact, you are more fully yourself than you ever were
before, or rather it is only now that you are truly yourself.
"Be like a servant waiting for the return of the master," says Jesus. The servant does
not know at what hour the master is going to come. So he stays awake, alert, poised, still,
lest he miss the master's arrival. In another parable, Jesus speaks of the five careless
(unconscious) women who do not have enough oil (consciousness) to keep their lamps
burning (stay present) and so miss the bridegroom (the Now) and don't get to the wedding
feast (enlightenment). These five stand in contrast to the five wise women who have
enough oil (stay conscious).
Even the men who wrote the Gospels did not understand the meaning of these
parables, so the first misinterpretations and distortions crept in as they were written
down. With subsequent erroneous interpretations, the real meaning was completely lost.
These are parables not about the end of the world but about the end of psychological
time. They point to the transcendence of the egoic mind and the possibility of living in an
entirely new state of consciousness.
BEAUTY ARISES IN THE STILLNESS OF YOUR PRESENCE
What you have just described is something that I occasionally experience for brief
moments when I am alone and surrounded by nature.
Yes. Zen masters use the word satori to describe a flash of insight, a moment of no-mind
and total presence. Although satori is not a lasting transformation, be grateful when it
comes, for it gives you a taste of enlightenment. You may, indeed, have experienced it
many times without knowing what it is and realizing its importance. Presence is needed
to become aware of the beauty, the majesty, the sacredness of nature. Have you ever
gazed up into the infinity of space on a clear night, awestruck by the absolute stillness and
inconceivable vastness of it? Have you listened, truly listened, to the sound of a mountain
stream in the forest? Or to the song of a blackbird at dusk on a quiet summer evening? To
become aware of such things, the mind needs to be still. You have to put down for a moment
your personal baggage of problems, of past and future, as well as all your knowledge;
otherwise, you will see but not see, hear but not hear. Your total presence is required.
Beyond the beauty of the external forms, there is more here: something that cannot be
named, something ineffable, some deep, inner, holy essence. Whenever and wherever there is
beauty, this inner essence shines through somehow. It only reveals itself to you when you are
present. Could it be that this nameless essence and your presence are one and the same?
Would it be there without your presence? Go deeply into it. Find out for yourself.

§
When you experienced those moments of presence, you likely didn't realize that you were
briefly in a state of no-mind. This is because the gap between that state and the influx of
thought was too narrow. Your satori may only have lasted for a few seconds before the mind
came in, but it was there; otherwise, you would not have experienced the beauty. Mind can
neither recognize nor create beauty. Only for a few seconds, while you were completely
present, was that beauty or that sacredness there. Because of the narrowness of that gap and a
lack of vigilance and alertness on your part, you were probably unable to see the fundamental
difference between the perception, the thought-less awareness of beauty, and the naming and
interpreting of it as thought: The time gap was so small that it seemed to be a single process.
The truth is, however, that the moment thought came in, all you had was a memory of it.
The wider the time gap between perception and thought, the more depth there is to
you as a human being, which is to say the more conscious you are.
Many people are so imprisoned in their minds that the beauty of nature does not
really exist for them. They might say, “What a pretty flower,” but it’s just a mechanical
mental labeling. Because they are not still, they are not present, they don’t truly see that
flower, don’t feel its essence, its holiness – just as they don’t know themselves, don’t feel
their own essence, their own holiness.
Because we live in such a mind-dominated culture, most modern art, architecture, music,
and literature are devoid of beauty, of inner essence, with very few exceptions. The reason is
that the people who create those things cannot - even for a moment - free themselves from
their mind. So they are never in touch with that place within where true creativity and beauty
arise. The mind left to itself creates monstrosities, and not only in art galleries. Look at our
urban landscapes and industrial wastelands. No civilization has ever produced so much
ugliness.
REALIZING PURE CONSCIOUSNESS
Is presence the same as Being?
When you become conscious of Being, what is really happening is that Being becomes
conscious of itself. When Being becomes conscious of itself - that's presence. Since Being,
Consciousness, and Life are synonymous, we could say that presence means consciousness
becoming conscious of itself, or life attaining self-consciousness. But don't get attached to the
words, and don't make an effort to understand this. There is nothing that you need to
understand before you can become present.
I do understand what you just said, but it seems to imply that Being, the ultimate
transcendental reality, is not yet complete, that it is undergoing a process of development.
Does God need time for personal growth?
Yes, but only as seen from the limited perspective of the manifested universe. In the Bible,
God declares: "I am the Alpha and the Omega, and I am the living One." In the timeless
realm where God dwells, which is also your home, the beginning and the end, the Alpha and
the Omega, are one, and the essence of everything that ever has been and ever will be is
eternally present in an unmanifested state of oneness and perfection - totally beyond anything
the human mind can ever imagine or comprehend. In our world of seemingly separate forms,
however, timeless perfection is an inconceivable concept. Here even consciousness, which is
the light emanating from the eternal Source, seems to be subject to a process of development,
but this is due to our limited perception. It is not so in absolute terms. Nevertheless, let me
continue to speak for a moment about the evolution of consciousness in this world.
Everything that exists has Being, has God-essence, has some degree of consciousness.
Even a stone has rudimentary consciousness; otherwise, it would not be, and its atoms and
molecules would disperse. Everything is alive. The sun, the earth, plants, animals, humans all are expressions of consciousness in varying degrees, consciousness manifesting as form.
The world arises when consciousness takes on shapes and forms, thought forms and
material forms. Look at the millions of life forms on this planet alone. In the sea, on land, in
the air - and then each life form is replicated millions of times. To what end? Is someone or
something playing a game, a game with form? This is what the ancient seers of India asked
themselves. They saw the world as lila, a kind of divine game that God is playing. The
individual life forms are obviously not very important in this game. In the sea, most life
forms don't survive for more than a few minutes after being born. The human form turns to
dust pretty quickly too, and when it is gone it is as if it had never been. Is that tragic or cruel?
Only if you create a separate identity for each form, if you forget that its consciousness is
God-essence expressing itself in form. But you don't truly know that until you realize your
own God-essence as pure consciousness.
If a fish is born in your aquarium and you call it John, write out a birth certificate, tell
him about his family history, and two minutes later he gets eaten by another fish - that's
tragic. But it’s only tragic because you projected a separate self where there was none. You
got hold of a fraction of a dynamic process, a molecular dance, and made a separate entity
out of it.
Consciousness takes on the disguise of forms until they reach such complexity that it
completely loses itself in them. In present-day humans, consciousness is completely
identified with its disguise. It only knows itself as form and therefore lives in fear of the
annihilation of its physical or psychological form. This is the egoic mind, and this is where
considerable dysfunction sets in. It now looks as if something had gone very wrong
somewhere along the line of evolution. But even this is part of lila, the divine game. Finally,
the pressure of suffering created by this apparent dysfunction forces consciousness to
disidentify from form and awakens it from its dream of form: It regains self-consciousness,
but it is at a far deeper level than when it lost it.
This process is explained by Jesus in his parable of the lost son, who leaves his father's
home, squanders his wealth, becomes destitute, and is then forced by his suffering to return
home. When he does, his father loves him more than before. The son's state is the same as it
was before, yet not the same. It has an added dimension of depth. The parable describes a
journey from unconscious perfection, through apparent imperfection and "evil" to conscious
perfection.
Can you now see the deeper and wider significance of becoming present as the watcher
of your mind? Whenever you watch the mind, you withdraw consciousness from mind
forms, which then becomes what we call the watcher or the witness. Consequently, the
watcher - pure consciousness beyond form - becomes stronger, and the mental formations
become weaker. When we talk about watching the mind we are personalizing an event that is
truly of cosmic significance: through you, consciousness is awakening out of its dream of
identification with form and withdrawing from form. This foreshadows, but is already part
of, an event that is probably still in the distant future as far as chronological time is
concerned. The event is called - the end of the world.

§
When consciousness frees itself from its identification with physical and mental forms, it
becomes what we may call pure or enlightened consciousness, or presence. This has already
happened in a few individuals, and it seems destined to happen soon on a much larger scale,
although there is no absolute guarantee that it will happen. Most humans are still in the grip
of the egoic mode of consciousness: identified with their mind and run by their mind. If they
do not free themselves from their mind in time, they will be destroyed by it. They will
experience increasing confusion, conflict, violence, illness, despair, madness. Egoic mind has
become like a sinking ship. If you don't get off, you will go down with it. The collective
egoic mind is the most dangerously insane and destructive entity ever to inhabit this planet.
What do you think will happen on this planet if human consciousness remains unchanged?
Already for most humans, the only respite they find from their own minds is to
occasionally revert to a level of consciousness below thought. Everyone does that every night
during sleep. But this also happens to some extent through sex, alcohol, and other drugs that
suppress excessive mind activity. If it weren't for alcohol, tranquilizers, antidepressants, as
well as the illegal drugs, which are all consumed in vast quantities, the insanity of the human
mind would become even more glaringly obvious than it is already. I believe that, if deprived
of their drugs, a large part of the population would become a danger to themselves and
others. These drugs, of course, simply keep you stuck in dysfunction. Their widespread use
only delays the breakdown of the old mind structures and the emergence of higher
consciousness. While individual users may get some relief from the daily torture inflicted on
them by their minds, they are prevented from generating enough conscious presence to rise
above thought and so find true liberation.
Falling back to a level of consciousness below mind, which is the pre-thinking level of
our distant ancestors and of animals and plants, is not an option for us. There is no way back.
If the human race is to survive, it will have to go on to the next stage. Consciousness is
evolving throughout the universe in billions of forms. So even if we didn't make it, this
wouldn't matter on a cosmic scale. No gain in consciousness is ever lost, so it would simply
express itself through some other form. But the very fact that I am speaking here and you are
listening or reading this is a dear sign that the new consciousness is gaining a foothold on the
planet.
There is nothing personal in this: I am not teaching you. You are consciousness, and you
are listening to yourself. There is an Eastern saying: "The teacher and the taught together
create the teaching." In any case, the words in themselves are not important. They are not the
Truth; they only point to it. I speak from presence, and as I speak, you may be able to join me
in that state. Although every word that I use has a history, of course, and comes from the past,
as all language does, the words that I speak to you now are carriers of the high-energy
frequency of presence, quite apart from the meaning they convey as words.
Silence is an even more potent carrier of presence, so when you read this or listen to me
speak, be aware of the silence between and underneath the words. Be aware of the gaps. To
listen to the silence, wherever you are, is an easy and direct way of becoming present. Even if
there is noise, there is always some silence underneath and in between the sounds. Listening
to the silence immediately creates stillness inside you. Only the stillness in you can perceive
the silence outside. And what is stillness other than presence, consciousness freed from
thought forms? Here is the living realization of what we have been talking about.

§
CHRIST: THE REALITY OF YOUR DIVINE PRESENCE

Don't get attached to any one word. You can substitute "Christ" for presence, if that is more
meaningful to you. Christ is your Godessence or the Self, as it is sometimes called in the
East. The only difference between Christ and presence is that Christ refers to your indwelling
divinity regardless of whether you are conscious of it or not, whereas presence means your
awakened divinity or God-essence.
Many misunderstandings and false beliefs about Christ will clear if you realize that there
is no past or future in Christ. To say that Christ was or will be is a contradiction in terms. Jesus
was. He was a man who lived two thousand years ago and realized divine presence, his true
nature. And so he said: "Before Abraham was, I am." He did not say. "I already existed before
Abraham was born." That would have meant that he was still within the dimension of time
and form identity. The words I am used in a sentence that starts in the past tense indicate a
radical shift, a discontinuity in the temporal dimension. It is a Zen-like statement of great
profundity. Jesus attempted to convey directly, not through discursive thought, the meaning
of presence, of self-realization. He had gone beyond the consciousness dimension governed
by time, into the realm of the timeless. The dimension of eternity had come into this world.
Eternity, of course, does not mean endless time, but no time. Thus, the man Jesus became
Christ, a vehicle for pure consciousness. And what is God's self-definition in the Bible? Did
God say "I have always been, and I always will be?" Of course not. That would have given
reality to past and future. God said: "I AM THAT I AM." No time here, just presence.
The "second coming" of Christ is a transformation of human consciousness, a shift from
time to presence, from thinking to pure consciousness, not the arrival of some man or
woman. If "Christ" were to return tomorrow in some externalized form, what could he or she
possibly say to you other than this: "I am the Truth. I am divine presence. I am eternal life. I
am within you. I am here. I am Now."

§
Never personalize Christ. Don't make Christ into a form identity. Avatars, divine mothers,
enlightened masters, the very few that are real, are not special as persons. Without a false self
to uphold, defend, and feed, they are more simple, more ordinary than the ordinary man or
woman. Anyone with a strong ego would regard them as insignificant or, more likely, not see
them at all.
If you are drawn to an enlightened teacher, it is because there is already enough presence
in you to recognize presence in another. There were many people who did not recognize
Jesus or the Buddha, as there are and always have been many people who are drawn to false
teachers. Egos are drawn to bigger egos. Darkness cannot recognize light. Only light can
recognize light. So don't believe that the light is outside you or that it can only come through
one particular form. If only your master is an incarnation of God, then who are you? Any
kind of exclusivity is identification with form, and identification with form means ego, no
matter how well disguised.
Use the master's presence to reflect your own identity beyond name and form back to
you and to become more intensely present yourself. You will soon realize that there is no
"mine" or "yours" in presence. Presence is one.
Group work can also be helpful for intensifying the light of your presence. A group of
people coming together in a state of presence generates a collective energy field of great
intensity. It not only raises the degree of presence of each member of the group but also
helps to free the collective human consciousness from its current state of mind dominance.
This will make the state of presence increasingly more accessible to individuals. However,
unless at least one member of the group is already firmly established in it and thus can hold
the energy frequency of that state, the egoic mind can easily reassert itself and sabotage the
group's endeavors. Although group work is invaluable, it is not enough, and you must not
come to depend on it. Nor must you come to depend on a teacher or a master, except during
the transitional period, when you are learning the meaning and practice of presence.

CHAPTER SIX

THE INNER BODY
BEING IS YOUR DEEPEST SELF
You spoke earlier about the importance of having deep roots within or inhabiting the body.
Can you explain what you meant by that?
The body can become a point of access into the realm of Being. Let's go into that more
deeply now.
I am still not quite sure if I fully understand what you mean by Being.
"Water? What do you mean by that? I don't understand it." This is what a fish would say if it
had a human mind.
Please stop trying to understand Being. You have already had significant glimpses of
Being, but the mind will always try to squeeze it into a little box and then put a label on it. It
cannot be done. It cannot become an object of knowledge. In Being, subject and object merge
into one.
Being can be felt as the ever-present I am that is beyond name and form. To feel and thus
to know that you are and to abide in that deeply rooted state is enlightenment, is the truth that
Jesus says will make you free.

Free from what?
Free from the illusion that you are nothing more than your physical body and your mind. This
"illusion of the self," as the Buddha calls it, is the core error. Free from fear in its countless
disguises as the inevitable consequence of that illusion - the fear that is your constant
tormentor as long as you derive your sense of self only from this ephemeral and vulnerable
form. And free from sin, which is the suffering you unconsciously inflict on yourself and
others as long as this illusory sense of self governs what you think, say, and do.
LOOK BEYOND THE WORDS

I don't like the word sin. It implies that I am being judged and found guilty.
I can understand that. Over the centuries, many erroneous views and interpretations have
accumulated around words such as sin, due to ignorance, misunderstanding, or a desire to
control, but they contain an essential core of truth. If you are unable to look beyond such
interpretations and so cannot recognize the reality to which the word points, then don't use it.
Don't get stuck on the level of words. A word is no more than a means to an end. It's an
abstraction. Not unlike a signpost, it points beyond itself. The word honey isn't honey. You
can study and talk about honey for as long as you like, but you won't really know it until you
taste it. After you have tasted it, the word becomes less important to you. You won't be
attached to it anymore. Similarly, you can talk or think about God continuously for the rest of
your life, but does that mean you know or have even glimpsed the reality to which the word
points? It really is no more than an obsessive attachment to a signpost, a mental idol.
The reverse also applies: If, for whatever reason, you disliked the word honey, that might
prevent you from ever tasting it. If you had a strong aversion to the word God, which is a
negative form of attachment, you may be denying not just the word but also the reality to
which it points. You would be cutting yourself off from the possibility of experiencing that
reality. All this is, of course, intrinsically connected with being identified with your mind.
So, if a word doesn't work for you anymore, then drop it and replace it with one that
does work. If you don't like the word sin, then call it unconsciousness or insanity. That may
get you closer to the truth, the reality behind the word, than a long-misused word like sin,
and leaves little room for guilt.
I don't like those words either. They imply that there is something wrong with me. I am being
judged.

Of course there is something wrong with you - and you are not being judged.
I don't mean to offend you personally, but do you not belong to the human race that has
killed over 100 million members of their own species in the twentieth century alone?
You mean guilt by association?

It is not a question of guilt. But as long as you are run by the egoic mind, you are part of the
collective insanity. Perhaps you haven't looked very deeply into the human condition in its
state of dominance by the egoic mind. Open your eyes and see the fear, the despair, the greed,
and the violence that are all-pervasive. See the heinous cruelty and suffering on an
unimaginable scale that humans have inflicted and continue to inflict on each other as well as
on other life forms on the planet. You don't need to condemn. Just observe. That is sin. That is
insanity. That is unconsciousness. Above all, don't forget to observe your own mind. Seek out
the root of the insanity there.
FINDING YOUR INVISIBLE AND INDESTRUCTIBLE REALITY

You said that identification with our physical form is part of the illusion, so how can the body,
the physical form, bring you to a realization of Being?

The body that you can see and touch cannot take you into Being. But that visible and tangible
body is only an outer shell, or rather a limited and distorted perception of a deeper reality. In
your natural state of connectedness with Being, this deeper reality can be felt every moment
as the invisible inner body, the animating presence within you. So to "inhabit the body" is to
feel the body from within, to feel the life inside the body and thereby come to know that you
are beyond the outer form.
But that is only the beginning of an inward journey that will take you ever more deeply
into a realm of great stillness and peace, yet also of great power and vibrant life. At first, you
may only get fleeting glimpses of it, but through them you will begin to realize that you are
not just a meaningless fragment in an alien universe, briefly suspended between birth and
death, allowed a few short-lived pleasures followed by pain and ultimate annihilation.
Underneath your outer form, you are connected with something so vast, so immeasurable and
sacred, that it cannot be conceived or spoken of - yet I am speaking of it now. I am speaking
of it not to give you something to believe in but to show you how you can know it for
yourself.
You are cut off from Being as long as your mind takes up all your attention. When this
happens - and it happens continuously for most people - you are not in your body. The mind
absorbs all your consciousness and transforms it into mind stuff. You cannot stop thinking.
Compulsive thinking has become a collective disease. Your whole sense of who you are is
then derived from mind activity. Your identity, as it is no longer rooted in Being, becomes a
vulnerable and ever-needy mental construct, which creates fear as the predominant
underlying emotion. The one thing that truly matters is then missing from your life:
awareness of your deeper self - your invisible and indestructible reality.
To become conscious of Being, you need to reclaim consciousness from the mind. This is
one of the most essential tasks on your spiritual journey. It will free vast amounts of
consciousness that previously had been trapped in useless and compulsive thinking. A very
effective way of doing this is simply to take the focus of your attention away from thinking
and direct it into the body, where Being can be felt in the first instance as the invisible energy
field that gives life to what you perceive as the physical body.
CONNECTING WITH THE INNER BODY

Please try it now. You may find it helpful to close your eyes for this practice. Later on, when
"being in the body' has become natural and easy, this will no longer be necessary. Direct your
attention into the body. Feel it from within. Is it alive? Is there life in your hands, arms, legs,
and feet - in your abdomen, your chest? Can you feel the subtle energy field that pervades the
entire body and gives vibrant life to every organ and every cell? Can you feel it
simultaneously in all parts of the body as a single field of energy? Keep focusing on the
feeling of your inner body for a few moments. Do not start to think about it. Feel it. The more
attention you give it, the clearer and stronger this feeling will become. It will feel as if every
cell is becoming more alive, and if you have a strong visual sense, you may get an image of
your body becoming luminous. Although such an image can help you temporarily, pay more
attention to the feeling than to any image that may arise. An image, no matter how beautiful
or powerful, is already defined in form, so there is less scope for penetrating more deeply.

§
The feeling of your inner body is formless, limitless, and unfathomable. You can always go
into it more deeply. If you cannot feel very much at this stage, pay attention to whatever you
can feel. Perhaps there is just a slight tingling in your hands or feet. That's good enough for
the moment. Just focus on the feeling. Your body is coming alive. Later, we will practice
some more. Please open your eyes now, but keep some attention in the inner energy field of
the body even as you look around the room. The inner body lies at the threshold between
your form identity and your essence identity, your true nature. Never lose touch with it.

§
TRANSFORMATION THROUGH THE BODY

Why have most religions condemned or denied the body? It seems that spiritual seekers have
always regarded the body as a hindrance or even as sinful.

Why have so few seekers become finders?
On the level of the body, humans are very close to animals. All the basic bodily functions
- pleasure, pain, breathing, eating, drinking, defecating, sleeping, the drive to find a mate and
procreate, and of course birth and death - we share with the animals. A long time after their
fall from a state of grace and oneness into illusion, humans suddenly woke up in what
seemed to be an animal body - and they found this very disturbing. "Don't fool yourself. You
are no more than an animal." This seemed to be the truth that was staring them in the face.
But it was too disturbing a truth to tolerate. Adam and Eve saw that they were naked, and
they became afraid. Unconscious denial of their animal nature set in very quickly. The threat
that they might be taken over by powerful instinctual drives and revert back to complete
unconsciousness was indeed a very real one. Shame and taboos appeared around certain parts
of the body and bodily functions, especially sexuality. The light of their consciousness was
not yet strong enough to make friends with their animal nature, to allow it to be and even
enjoy that aspect of themselves - let alone to go deeply into it to find the divine hidden within
it, the reality within the illusion. So they did what they had to do. They began to disassociate
from their body. They now saw themselves as having a body, rather than just being it.
When religions arose, this disassociation became even more pronounced as the "you are
not your body" belief. Countless people in East and West throughout the ages have tried to
find God, salvation, or enlightenment through denial of the body. This took the form of denial
of sense pleasures and of sexuality in particular, fasting, and other ascetic practices. They
even inflicted pain on the body in an attempt to weaken or punish it because they regarded it
as sinful. In Christianity, this used to be called mortification of the flesh. Others tried to
escape from the body by entering trance states or seeking out-of-the-body experiences. Many
still do. Even the Buddha is said to have practiced body denial through fasting and extreme
forms of asceticism for six years, but he did not attain enlightenment until after he had given
up this practice.
The fact is that no one has ever become enlightened through denying or fighting the
body or through an out-of-the-body experience. Although such an experience can be
fascinating and can give you a glimpse of the state of liberation from the material form, in
the end you will always have to return to the body, where the essential work of
transformation takes place. Transformation is through the body, not away from it. This is why
no true master has ever advocated fighting or leaving the body, although their mind-based
followers often have.
Of the ancient teachings concerning the body, only certain fragments survive, such as
Jesus's statement that "your whole body will be filled with light," or they survive as myths,
such as the belief that Jesus never relinquished his body but remained one with it and
ascended into "heaven” with it. Almost no one to this day has understood those fragments or
the hidden meaning of certain myths, and the "you are not your body" belief has prevailed
universally, leading to body denial and attempts to escape from the body. Countless seekers
have thus been prevented from attaining spiritual realization for themselves and becoming
finders.

Is it possible to recover the lost teachings on the significance of the body or to reconstruct them
from the existing fragments?

There is no need for that. All spiritual teachings originate from the same Source. In that
sense, there is and always has been only one master, who manifests in many different forms. I
am that master, and so are you, once you are able to access the Source within. And the way to
it is through the inner body. Although all spiritual teachings originate from the same Source,
once they become verbalized and written down they are obviously no more than collections
of words - and a word is nothing but a signpost, as we talked about earlier. All such teachings
are signposts pointing the way back to the Source.
I have already spoken of the Truth that is hidden within your body, but I will summarize
for you again the lost teachings of the masters - so here is another signpost. Please endeavor
to feel your inner body as you read or listen.
SERMON ON THE BODY

What you perceive as a dense physical structure called the body, which is subject to disease,
old age, and death, is not ultimately real - is not you. It is a misperception of your essential
reality that is beyond birth and death, and is due to the limitations of your mind, which,
having lost touch with Being, creates the body as evidence of its illusory belief in separation
and to justify its state of fear. But do not turn away from the body, for within that symbol of
impermanence, limitation, and death that you perceive as the illusory creation of your mind is
concealed the splendor of your essential and immortal reality. Do not turn your attention
elsewhere in your search for the Truth, for it is nowhere else to be found but within your
body.
Do not fight against the body, for in doing so you are fighting against your own reality.
You are your body. The body that you can see and touch is only a thin illusory veil.
Underneath it lies the invisible inner body, the doorway into Being, into Life Unmanifested.
Through the inner body, you are inseparably connected to this unmanifested One Life birthless, deathless, eternally present. Through the inner body, you are forever one with God.

§
HAVE DEEP ROOTS WITHIN

The key is to be in a state of permanent connectedness with your inner body - to feel it at all
times. This will rapidly deepen and transform your life. The more consciousness you direct
into the inner body, the higher its vibrational frequency becomes, much like a light that grows
brighter as you turn up the dimmer switch and so increase the flow of electricity. At this
higher energy level, negativity cannot affect you anymore, and you tend to attract new
circumstances that reflect this higher frequency.
If you keep your attention in the body as much as possible, you will be anchored in the
Now. You won’t lose yourself in the external world, and you won’t lose yourself in your
mind. Thoughts and emotions, fears and desires, may still be there to some extent, but they
won't take you over.
Please examine where your attention is at this moment. You are listening to me, or you
are reading these words in a book. That is the focus of your attention. You are also
peripherally aware of your surroundings, other people, and so on. Furthermore, there may be
some mind activity around what you are hearing or reading, some mental commentary. Yet
there is no need for any of this to absorb all your attention. See if you can be in touch with
your inner body at the same time. Keep some of your attention within. Don't let it all flow
out. Feel your whole body from within, as a single field of energy. It is almost as if you were
listening or reading with your whole body. Let this be your practice in the days and weeks to
come.
Do not give all your attention away to the mind and the external world. By all means
focus on what you are doing, but feel the inner body at the same time whenever possible.
Stay rooted within. Then observe how this changes your state of consciousness and the
quality of what you are doing.
Whenever you are waiting, wherever it may be, use that time to feel the inner body. In
this way, traffic jams and line-ups become very enjoyable. Instead of mentally projecting
yourself away from the Now, go more deeply into the Now by going more deeply into the
body.
The art of inner-body awareness will develop into a completely new way of living, a state
of permanent connectedness with Being, and will add a depth to your life that you have never
known before.
It is easy to stay present as the observer of your mind when you are deeply rooted within
your body. No matter what happens on the outside, nothing can shake you anymore.
Unless you stay present - and inhabiting your body is always an essential aspect of it you will continue to be run by your mind. The script in your head that you learned a long
time ago, the conditioning of your mind, will dictate your thinking and your behavior. You
may be free of it for brief intervals, but rarely for long. This is especially true when
something "goes wrong" or there is some loss or upset. Your conditioned reaction will then be
involuntary, automatic, and predictable, fueled by the one basic emotion that underlies the
mind-identified state of consciousness: fear.
So when such challenges come, as they always do, make it a habit to go within at once
and focus as much as you can on the inner energy field of your body. This need not take long,
just a few seconds. But you need to do it the moment that the challenge presents itself. Any
delay will allow a conditioned mental-emotional reaction to arise and take you over. When
you focus within and feel the inner body, you immediately become still and present as you
are withdrawing consciousness from the mind. If a response is required in that situation, it
will come up from this deeper level. Just as the sun is infinitely brighter than a candle flame,
there is infinitely more intelligence in Being than in your mind.
As long as you are in conscious contact with your inner body, you are like a tree that is
deeply rooted in the earth, or a building with a deep and solid foundation. The latter analogy
is used by Jesus in the generally misunderstood parable of the two men who build a house.
One man builds it on the sand, without a foundation, and when the storms and floods come,
the house is swept away. The other man digs deep until he reaches the rock, then builds his
house, which is not swept away by the floods.
BEFORE YOU ENTER THE BODY, FORGIVE

I felt very uncomfortable when I tried to put my attention on the inner body. There was a
feeling of agitation and some nausea. So I haven't been able to experience what you are
talking about.

What you felt was a lingering emotion that you were probably unaware of, until you started
putting some attention into the body. Unless you first give it some attention, the emotion will
prevent you from gaining access to the inner body, which lies at a deeper level underneath it.
Attention does not mean that you start thinking about it. It means to just observe the emotion,
to feel it fully, and so to acknowledge and accept it as it is. Some emotions are easily
identified: anger, fear, grief, and so on. Others may be much harder to label. They may just be
vague feelings of unease, heaviness, or constriction, halfway between an emotion and a
physical sensation. In any case, what matters is not whether you can attach a mental label to
it but whether you can bring the feeling of it into awareness as much as possible. Attention is
the key to transformation - and full attention also implies acceptance. Attention is like a beam
of light - the focused power of your consciousness that transmutes everything into itself.
In a fully functional organism, an emotion has a very short life span. It is like a
momentary ripple or wave on the surface of your Being. When you are not in your body,
however, an emotion can survive inside you for days or weeks, or join with other emotions of
a similar frequency that have merged and become the pain body, a parasite that can live
inside you for years, feed on your energy, lead to physical illness, and make your life
miserable. (see Chapter 2).
So place your attention on feeling the emotion, and check whether your mind is holding
on to a grievance pattern such as blame, self-pity, or resentment that is feeding the emotion.
If that is the case, it means that you haven't forgiven. Non-forgiveness is often toward another
person or yourself, but it may just as well be toward any situation or condition - past, present
or future - that your mind refuses to accept. Yes, there can be non-forgiveness even with
regard to the future. This is the mind's refusal to accept uncertainty, to accept that the future is
ultimately beyond its control. Forgiveness is to relinquish your grievance and so to let go of
grief. It happens naturally once you realize that your grievance serves no purpose except to
strengthen a false sense of self. Forgiveness is to offer no resistance to life - to allow life to
live through you. The alternatives are pain and suffering, a greatly restricted flow of life
energy, and in many cases physical disease.
The moment you truly forgive, you have reclaimed your power from the mind. Nonforgiveness is the very nature of the mind, just as the mind-made false self, the ego, cannot
survive without strife and conflict. The mind cannot forgive. Only you can. You become
present, you enter your body, you feel the vibrant peace and stillness that emanate from
Being. That is why Jesus said: "Before you enter the temple, forgive."

§
YOUR LINK WITH THE UNMANIFESTED
What is the relationship between presence and the inner body?
Presence is pure consciousness - consciousness that has been reclaimed from the mind, from
the world of form. The inner body is your link with the Unmanifested, and in its deepest
aspect is the Unmanifested: the Source from which consciousness emanates as light
emanates from the sun. Awareness of the inner body is consciousness remembering its origin
and returning to the Source.
Is the Unmanifested the same as Being?

Yes. The word Unmanifested attempts, by way of negation, to express That which cannot be
spoken, thought or imagined. It points to what it is by saying what it is not. Being, on the
other hand, is a positive term. Please don't get attached to either of these words or start
believing in them. They are no more than signposts.
You said that presence is consciousness that has been reclaimed from the mind. Who does the
reclaiming?

You do. But since in your essence you are consciousness, we might as well say that it is an
awakening of consciousness from the dream of form. This does not mean that your own
form will instantly vanish in an explosion of light. You can continue in your present form yet
be aware of the formless and deathless deep within you.
I must admit that this is way beyond my comprehension, and yet on some deeper level I seem to
know what you are talking about. It's more like a feeling than anything else. Am I deceiving
myself

No, you are not. Feeling will get you closer to the truth of who you are than thinking. I
cannot tell you anything that deep within you don't already know. When you have reached a
certain stage of inner connectedness, you recognize the truth when you hear it. If you haven't
reached that stage yet, the practice of body awareness will bring about the deepening that is
necessary.
SLOWING DOWN THE AGING PROCESS

In the meantime, awareness of the inner body has other benefits in the physical realm. One of
them is a significant slowing down of the aging of the physical body.
Whereas the outer body normally appears to grow old and wither fairly quickly, the inner
body does not change with time, except that you may feel it more deeply and become it more
fully. If you are twenty years old now, the energy field of your inner body will feel just the same
when you are eighty. It will be just as vibrantly alive. As soon as your habitual state changes from
being out-of-the-body and trapped in your mind to being in-the-body and present in the Now,
your physical body will feel lighter, dearer, more alive. As there is more consciousness in the
body, its molecular structure actually becomes less dense. More consciousness means a lessening
of the illusion of materiality.
When you become identified more with the timeless inner body than with the outer body,
when presence becomes your normal mode of consciousness and past and future no longer
dominate your attention, you do not accumulate time anymore in your psyche and in the cells of
the body. The accumulation of time as the psychological burden of past and future greatly impairs
the cells' capacity for self-renewal. So if you inhabit the inner body, the outer body will grow old
at a much slower rate, and even when it does, your timeless essence will shine through the outer
form, and you will not give the appearance of an old person.
Is there any scientific evidence for this?
Try it out and you will be the evidence.
STRENGTHENING THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

Another benefit of this practice in the physical realm is a great strengthening of the immune
system which occurs when you inhabit the body. The more consciousness you bring into the
body, the stronger the immune system becomes. It is as if every cell awakens and rejoices. The
body loves your attention. It is also a potent form of self-healing. Most illnesses creep in when
you are not present in the body. If the master is not present in the house, all kinds of shady characters will take up residence there. When you inhabit your body, it will be hard for unwanted
guests to enter.
It is not only your physical immune system that becomes strengthened; your psychic immune
system is greatly enhanced as well. The latter protects you from the negative mental-emotional
force fields of others, which are highly contagious. Inhabiting the body protects you not by
putting up a shield, but by raising the frequency vibration of your total energy field, so that
anything that vibrates at a lower frequency, such as fear, anger, depression, and so on, now exists
in what is virtually a different order of reality. It doesn't enter your field of consciousness
anymore, or if it does you don't need to offer any resistance to it because it passes right through
you. Please don't just accept or reject what I am saying. Put it to the test.
There is a simple but powerful self-healing meditation that you can do whenever you feel the
need to boost your immune system. It is particularly effective if used when you feel the first
symptoms of an illness, but it also works with illnesses that are already entrenched if you use it at
frequent intervals and with an intense focus. It will also counteract any disruption of your energy
field by some form of negativity. However, it is not a substitute for the moment-to-moment
practice of being in the body, otherwise, its effect will only be temporary. Here it is.
When you are unoccupied for a few minutes, and especially last thing at night before falling
asleep and first thing in the morning before getting up, "flood" your body with consciousness.
Close your eyes. Lie flat on your back. Choose different parts of your body to focus your
attention on briefly at first: hands, feet, arms, legs, abdomen, chest, head, and so on. Feel the life
energy inside those parts as intensely as you can. Stay with each part for fifteen seconds or so.
Then let your attention run through the body like a wave a few times, from feet to head and
back again. This need only take a minute or so. After that, feel the inner body in its totality, as
a single field of energy. Hold that feeling for a few minutes. Be intensely present during that
time, present in every cell of your body. Don't be concerned if the mind occasionally
succeeds in drawing your attention out of the body and you lose yourself in some thought. As
soon as you notice that this has happened, just return your attention to the inner body.
LET THE BREATH TAKE YOU INTO THE BODY

At times, when my mind has been very active, it has acquired such momentum that I find it
impossible to take my attention away from it and feel the inner body. This happens particularly
when I get into a worry or anxiety pattern. Do you have any suggestions?

If at any time you are finding it hard to get in touch with the inner body, it is usually easier to
focus on your breathing first. Conscious breathing, which is a powerful meditation in its own
right, will gradually put you in touch with the body. Follow the breath with your attention as
it moves in and out of your body. Breathe into the body, and feel your abdomen expanding
and contracting slightly with each inhalation and exhalation. If you find it easy to visualize,
dose your eyes and see yourself surrounded by light or immersed in a luminous substance - a
sea of consciousness. Then breathe in that light. Feel that luminous substance filling up your
body and making it luminous also. Then gradually focus more on the feeling. You are now in
your body. Don't get attached to any visual image.

§
CREATIVE USE OF MIND

If you need to use your mind for a specific purpose, use it in conjunction with your inner
body. Only if you are able to be conscious without thought can you use your mind creatively,
and the easiest way to enter that state is through your body. Whenever an answer, a solution,
or a creative idea is needed, stop thinking for a moment by focusing attention on your inner
energy field. Become aware of the stillness. When you resume thinking, it will be fresh and
creative. In any thought activity, make it a habit to go back and forth every few minutes or so
between thinking and an inner kind of listening, an inner stillness. We could say, don't just
think with your head, think with your whole body.

§
THE ART OF LISTENING

When listening to another person, don't just listen with your mind, listen with your whole
body. Feel the energy field of your inner body as you listen. That takes attention away from
thinking and creates a still space that enables you to truly listen without the mind interfering.
You are giving the other person space - space to be. It is the most precious gift you can give.
Most people don't know how to listen because the major part of their attention is taken up by
thinking. They pay more attention to that than to what the other person is saying, and none at
all to what really matters: the Being of the other person underneath the words and the mind.
Of course, you cannot feel someone else's Being except through your own. This is the
beginning of the realization of oneness, which is love. At the deepest level of Being, you are
one with all that is.
Most human relationships consist mainly of minds interacting with each other, not
of human beings communicating, being in communion. No relationship can thrive in that
way, and that is why there is so much conflict in relationships. When the mind is running
your life, conflict, strife and problems are inevitable. Being in touch with your inner body
creates a clear space of no-mind within which the relationship can flower.

CHAPTER SEVEN

PORTALS INTO THE UNMANIFESTED
GOING DEEPLY INTO THE BODY

I can feel the energy inside my body, especially in my arms and legs, but I don't seem to be able
to go more deeply, as you suggested earlier.

Make it into a meditation. It needn't take long. Ten to fifteen minutes of clock time should be
sufficient. Make sure first that there are no external distractions such as telephones or people
who are likely to interrupt you. Sit on a chair, but don't lean back. Keep the spine erect.
Doing so will help you to stay alert. Alternatively, choose your own favorite position for
meditation.
Make sure the body is relaxed. Close your eyes. Take a few deep breaths. Feel yourself
breathing into the lower abdomen, as it were. Observe how it expands and contracts slightly
with each in and out breath. Then become aware of the entire inner energy field of the body.
Don't think about it -feel it. By doing this, you reclaim consciousness from the mind. If you
find it helpful, use the "light" visualization I described earlier.
When you can feel the inner body clearly as a single field of energy, let go, if possible, of
any visual image and focus exclusively on the feeling. If you can, also drop any mental image
you may still have of the physical body. All that is left then is an all-encompassing sense of
presence or "beingness," and the inner body is felt to be without a boundary. Then take your
attention even more deeply into that feeling. Become one with it. Merge with the energy
field, so that there is no longer a perceived duality of the observer and the observed, of you
and your body. The distinction between inner and outer also dissolves now, so there is no
inner body anymore. By going deeply into the body, you have transcended the body.
Stay in this realm of pure Being for as long as feels comfortable; then become aware
again of the physical body, your breathing and physical senses, and open your eyes. Look at
your surroundings for a few minutes in a meditative way - that is, without labeling them
mentally - and continue to feel the inner body as you do so.

§
Having access to that formless realm is truly liberating. It frees you from bondage to form
and identification with form. It is life in its undifferentiated state prior to its fragmentation
into multiplicity. We may call it the Unmanifested, the invisible Source of all things, the
Being within all beings. It is a realm of deep stillness and peace, but also of joy and intense
aliveness. Whenever you are present, you become "transparent" to some extent to the light,
the pure consciousness that emanates from this Source. You also realize that the light is not
separate from who you are but constitutes your very essence.
THE SOURCE OF CHI

Is the Unmanifested what in the East is called chi, a kind of universal life energy?

No, it isn't. The Unmanifested is the source of chi. Chi is the inner energy field of your body.
It is the bridge between the outer you and the Source. It lies halfway between the manifested,
the world of form, and the Unmanifested. Chi can be likened to a river or an energy stream. If
you take the focus of your consciousness deeply into the inner body, you are tracing the
course of this river back to its Source. Chi is movement; the Unmanifested is stillness. When
you reach a point of absolute stillness, which is nevertheless vibrant with life, you have gone
beyond the inner body and beyond chi to the Source itself the Unmanifested. Chi is the link
between the Unmanifested and the physical universe.
So if you take your attention deeply into the inner body, you may reach this point, this
singularity, where the world dissolves into the Unmanifested and the Unmanifested takes on
form as the energy stream of chi, which then becomes the world. This is the point of birth and
death. When your consciousness is directed outward, mind and world arise. When it is
directed inward, it realizes its own Source and returns home into the Unmanifested. Then,
when your consciousness comes back to the manifested world, you reassume the form
identity that you temporarily relinquished. You have a name, a past, a life situation, a future.
But in one essential respect, you are not the same person you were before: You will have
glimpsed a reality within yourself that is not "of this world," although it isn't separate from it,
just as it isn't separate from you.
Now let your spiritual practice be this: As you go about your life, don't give 100 percent
of your attention to the external world and to your mind. Keep some within. I have spoken
about this already. Feel the inner body even when engaged in everyday activities, especially
when engaged in relationships or when you are relating with nature. Feel the stillness deep
inside it. Keep the portal open. It is quite possible to be conscious of the Unmanifested
throughout your life. You feel it as a deep sense of peace somewhere in the background, a
stillness that never leaves you, no matter what happens out here. You become a bridge
between the Unmanifested and the manifested, between God and the world. This is the state
of connectedness with the Source that we call enlightenment.
Don't get the impression that the Unmanifested is separate from the manifested. How
could it be? It is the life within every form, the inner essence of all that exists. It pervades this
world. Let me explain.
DREAMLESS SLEEP

You take a journey into the Unmanifested every night when you enter the phase of deep
dreamless sleep. You merge with the Source. You draw from it the vital energy that sustains
you for a while when you return to the manifested, the world of separate forms. This energy
is much more vital than food: "Man does not live by bread alone." But in dreamless sleep,
you don't go into it consciously. Although the bodily functions are still operating, "you no
longer exist in that state. Can you imagine what it would be like to go into dreamless sleep
with full consciousness? It is impossible to imagine it, because that state has no content.
The Unmanifested does not liberate you until you enter it consciously. That's why Jesus
did not say. the truth will make you free, but rather "You will know the truth, and the truth
will make you free." This is not a conceptual truth. It is the truth of eternal life beyond form,
which is known directly or not at all. But don't attempt to stay conscious in dreamless sleep.
It is highly unlikely that you will succeed. At most, you may remain conscious during the
dream phase, but not beyond that. This is called lucid dreaming, which may be interesting
and fascinating, but it is not liberating.
So use your inner body as a portal through which you enter the Unmanifested, and keep
that portal open so that you stay connected with the Source at all times. It makes no
difference, as far as the inner body is concerned, whether your outer physical body is old or
young, frail or strong. The inner body is timeless. If you are not yet able to feel the inner
body, use one of the other portals, although ultimately they are all one. Some I have spoken
about at length already, but I'll mention them again briefly here.
OTHER PORTALS

The Now can be seen as the main portal. It is an essential aspect of every other portal,
including the inner body. You cannot be in your body without being intensely present in the
Now.
Time and the manifested are as inextricably linked as are the timeless Now and the
Unmanifested. When you dissolve psychological time through intense present-moment
awareness, you become conscious of the Unmanifested both directly and indirectly. Directly,
you feel it as the radiance and power of your conscious presence - no content, just presence.
Indirectly, you are aware of the Unmanifested in and through the sensory realm. In other
words, you feel the God-essence in every creature, every flower, every stone, and you realize:
"All that is, is holy." This is why Jesus, speaking entirely from his essence or Christ identity,
says in the Gospel of Thomas: "Split a piece of wood; I am there. Lift up a stone, and you
will find me there."
Another portal into the Unmanifested is created through the cessation of thinking. This
can start with a very simple thing, such as taking one conscious breath or looking, in a state
of intense alertness, at a flower, so that there is no mental commentary running at the same
time. There are many ways to create a gap in the incessant stream of thought. This is what
meditation is all about. Thought is part of the realm of the manifested. Continuous mind
activity keeps you imprisoned in the world of form and becomes an opaque screen that
prevents you from becoming conscious of the Unmanifested, conscious of the formless and
timeless God-essence in yourself and in all things and all creatures. When you are intensely
present, you don't need to be concerned about the cessation of thinking, of course, because
the mind then stops automatically. That's why I said the Now is an essential aspect of every
other portal.
Surrender - the letting go of mental-emotional resistance to what is - also becomes a
portal into the Unmanifested. The reason for this is simple: inner resistance cuts you off from
other people, from yourself, from the world around you. It strengthens the feeling of
separateness on which the ego depends for its survival. The stronger the feeling of
separateness, the more you are bound to the manifested, to the world of separate forms. The
more you are bound to the world of form, the harder and more impenetrable your form
identity becomes. The portal is closed, and you are cut off from the inner dimension, the
dimension of depth. In the state of surrender, your form identity softens and becomes
somewhat "transparent," as it were, so the Unmanifested can shine through you.
Its up to you to open a portal in your life that gives you conscious access to the
Unmanifested. Get in touch with the energy field of the inner body, be intensely present,
disidentify from the mind, surrender to what is; these are all portals you can use - but you
only need to use one.
Surely love must also be one of those portals?

No, it isn't. As soon as one of the portals is open, love is present in you as the "feelingrealization" of oneness. Love isn't a portal; its what comes through the portal into this world.
As long as you are completely trapped in your form identity, there can be no love. Your task
is not to search for love but to find a portal through which love can enter.
SILENCE

Are there any other portals apart from those you just mentioned?

Yes, there are. The Unmanifested is not separate from the manifested. It pervades this world,
but it is so well disguised that almost everybody misses it completely. If you know where to
look, you'll find it everywhere. A portal opens up every moment.
Do you hear that dog barking in the distance? Or that car passing by? Listen carefully.
Can you feel the presence of the Unmanifested in that? You can't? Look for it in the silence
out of which the sounds come and into which they return. Pay more attention to the silence
than to the sounds. Paying attention to outer silence creates inner silence: the mind becomes
still. A portal is opening up.
Every sound is born out of silence, dies back into silence, and during its life span is
surrounded by silence. Silence enables the sound to be. It is an intrinsic but unmanifested part
of every sound, every musical note, every song, every word. The Unmanifested is present in
this world as silence. This is why it has been said that nothing in this world is so like God as
silence. All you have to do is pay attention to it. Even during a conversation, become
conscious of the gaps between words, the brief silent intervals between sentences. As you do
that, the dimension of stillness grows within you. You cannot pay attention to silence without
simultaneously becoming still within. Silence without, stillness within. You have entered the
Unmanifested.
SPACE
Just as no sound can exist without silence, nothing can exist without no-thing, without the
empty space that enables it to be. Every physical object or body has come out of nothing, is
surrounded by nothing, and will eventually return to nothing. Not only that, but even inside
every physical body there is far more "nothing" than "something." Physicists tell us that the
solidity of matter is an illusion. Even seemingly solid matter, including your physical body, is
nearly 100 percent empty space - so vast are the distances between the atoms compared to
their size. What is more, even inside every atom there is mostly empty space. What is left is
more like a vibrational frequency than particles of solid matter, more like a musical note.
Buddhists have known that for over 2,500 years. "Form is emptiness, emptiness is form,"
states the Heart Sutra, one of the best known ancient Buddhist texts. The essence of all things
is emptiness.
The Unmanifested is not only present in this world as silence; it also pervades the entire
physical universe as space - from within and without. This is just as easy to miss 'as silence.
Everybody pays attention to the things in space, but who pays attention to space itself?
You seem to be implying that "emptiness" or "nothing" is not just nothing, that there is some
mysterious quality to it. What is this nothing?

You cannot ask such a question. Your mind is trying to make nothing into something. The
moment you make it into something, you have missed it. Nothing - space - is the appearance
of the Unmanifested as an externalized phenomenon in a sense-perceived world. That's about
as much as one can say about it, and even that is a kind of paradox. It cannot become an
object of knowledge. You can’t do a Ph.D. on "nothing." When scientists study space, they
usually make it into something and thereby miss its essence entirely. Not surprisingly, the
latest theory is that space isn't empty at all, that it is filled with some substance. Once you
have a theory, it's not too hard to find evidence to substantiate it, at least until some other
theory comes along.
"Nothing" can only become a portal into the Unmanifested for you if you don't try to
grasp or understand it.
Isn't that what we are doing here?

Not at all. I am giving you pointers to show you how you can bring the dimension of the
Unmanifested into your life. We are not trying to understand it. There is nothing to
understand.
Space has no "existence." "To exist" literally means "to stand out." You cannot
understand space because it doesn't stand out. Although in itself it has no existence, it enables
everything else to exist. Silence has no existence either, nor does the Unmanifested.
So what happens if you withdraw attention from the objects in space and become aware
of space itself? What is the essence of this room? The furniture, pictures, and so on are in the
room, but they are not the room. The floor, walls, and ceiling define the boundary of the
room, but they are not the room either. So what is the essence of the room? Space, of course,
empty space. There would be no "room" without it. Since space is "nothing," we can say that
what is not there is more important than what is there. So become aware of the space that is
all around you. Don't think about it. Feel it, as it were. Pay attention to "nothing."
As you do that, a shift in consciousness takes place inside you. Here is why. The inner
equivalent to objects in space such as furniture, walls, and so on are your mind objects:
thoughts, emotions, and the objects of the senses. And the inner equivalent of space is the
consciousness that enables your mind objects to be, just as space allows all things to be. So if
you withdraw attention from things - objects in space - you automatically withdraw attention
from your mind objects as well. In other words: You cannot think and be aware of space - or
of silence, for that matter. By becoming aware of the empty space around you, you
simultaneously become aware of the space of no-mind, of pure consciousness: the
Unmanifested. This is how the contemplation of space can become a portal for you.
Space and silence are two aspects of the same thing, the same nothing. They are an
externalization of inner space and inner silence, which is stillness: the infinitely creative
womb of all existence. Most humans are completely unconscious of this dimension. There is
no inner space, no stillness. They are out of balance. In other words, they know the world, or
think they do, but they don't know God. They identify exclusively with their own physical
and psychological form, unconscious of essence. And because every form is highly unstable,
they live in fear. This fear causes a deep misperception of themselves and of other humans, a
distortion in their vision of the world.
If some cosmic convulsion brought about the end of our world, the Unmanifested would
remain totally unaffected by this. A Course in Miracles expresses this truth poignantly.
"Nothing real can be threatened. Nothing unreal exists. Herein lies the peace of God."
If you remain in conscious connection with the Unmanifested, you value, love, and
deeply respect the manifested and every life form in it as an expression of the One Life
beyond form. You also know that every form is destined to dissolve again and that ultimately
nothing out here matters all that much. You have "overcome the world," in the words of
Jesus, or, as the Buddha put it, you have "crossed over to the other shore."
THE TRUE NATURE OF SPACE AND TIME

Now consider this: If there were nothing but silence, it wouldn't exist for you; you wouldn't
know what it is. Only when sound appears does silence come into being. Similarly, if there
were only space without any objects in space, it wouldn't exist for you. Imagine yourself as a
point of consciousness floating in the vastness of space - no stars, no galaxies, just emptiness.
Suddenly, space wouldn't be vast anymore; it would not be there at all. There would be no
speed, no movement from here to there. At least two points of reference are needed for
distance and space to come into being. Space comes into being the moment the One becomes
two, and as "two" become the "ten thousand things," as Lao Tse calls the manifested world,
space becomes more and more vast. So world and space arise simultaneously.
Nothing could be without space, yet space is nothing. Before the universe came into
being, before the "big bang" if you like, there wasn't a vast empty space waiting to be filled.
There was no space, as there was no thing. There was only the Unmanifested - the One.
When the One became "the ten thousand things," suddenly space seemed to be there and
enabled the many to be. Where did it come from? Was it created by God to accommodate the
universe? Of course not. Space is no-thing, so it was never created.
Go out on a dear night and look up at the sky. The thousands of stars you can see with the
naked eye are no more than an infinitesimal fraction of what is there. Over 100 billion
galaxies can already be detected with the most powerful telescopes, each galaxy an "island
universe" with billions of stars. Yet what is even more awe-inspiring is the infinity of space
itself, the depth and stillness that allows all of that magnificence to be. Nothing could be
more awe-inspiring and majestic than the inconceivable vastness and stillness of space, and
yet what is it? Emptiness, vast emptiness.
What appears to us as space in our universe perceived through the mind and the
senses is the Unmanifested itself, externalized. It is the "body" of God. And the greatest
miracle is this: That stillness and vastness that enables the universe to be, is not just out
there in space - it is also within you. When you are utterly and totally present, you
encounter it as the still inner space of no-mind. Within you, it is vast in depth, not in
extension. Spacial extension is ultimately a misperception of infinite depth - an attribute
of the one transcendental reality.
According to Einstein, space and time are not separate. I don't really understand it, but I think he
is saying that time is the fourth dimension of space. He calls it the "space-time continuum."

Yes. What you perceive externally as space and time are ultimately illusory, but they contain
a core of truth. They are the two essential attributes of God, infinity and eternity, perceived
as if they had an external existence outside you. Within you, both space and time have an
inner equivalent that reveals their true nature, as well as your own. Whereas space is the still,
infinitely deep realm of no-mind, the inner equivalent of time is presence, awareness of the
eternal Now. Remember that there is no distinction between them. When space and time are
realized within as the Unmanifested - no-mind and presence - external space and time
continue to exist for you, but they become much less important. The world, too, continues to
exist for you, but it will not bind you anymore.
Hence, the ultimate purpose of the world lies not within the world but in transcendence of
the world. Just as you would not be conscious of space if there were no objects in space, the
world is needed for the Unmanifested to be realized. You may have heard the Buddhist
saying: "If there were no illusion, there would be no enlightenment." It is through the world
and ultimately through you that the Unmanifested knows itself. You are here to enable the
divine purpose of the universe to unfold. That is how important you are!
CONSCIOUS DEATH
Apart from dreamless sleep, which I mentioned already, there is one other involuntary
portal. It opens up briefly at the time of physical death. Even if you have missed all the other
opportunities for spiritual realization during your lifetime, one last portal will open up for
you immediately after the body has died.
There are countless accounts by people who had a visual impression of this portal as
radiant light and then returned from what is commonly known as a near-death experience.
Many of them also spoke of a sense of blissful serenity and deep peace. In the Tibetan Book
of the Dead, it is described as "the luminous splendor of the colorless light of Emptiness,"
which it says is "your own true self." This portal opens up only very briefly, and unless you
have already encountered the dimension of the Unmanifested in your lifetime, you will
likely miss it. Most people carry too much residual resistance, too much fear, too much
attachment to sensory experience, too much identification with the manifested world. So
they see the portal, turn away in fear, and then lose consciousness. Most of what happens
after that is involuntary and automatic. Eventually, there will be another round of birth and
death. Their presence wasn't strong enough yet for conscious immortality.
So going through this portal does not mean annihilation?
As with all the other portals, your radiant true nature remains, but not the personality. In any
case, whatever is real or of true value in your personality is your true nature shining through.
This is never lost. Nothing that is of value, nothing that is real, is ever lost.
Approaching death and death itself, the dissolution of the physical form, is always a
great opportunity for spiritual realization. This opportunity is tragically missed most of the
time, since we live in a culture that is almost totally ignorant of death, as it is almost totally
ignorant of anything that truly matters.
Every portal is a portal of death, the death of the false self. When you go through it, you
cease to derive your identity from your psychological, mind-made form. You then realize
that death is an illusion, just as your identification with form was an illusion. The end of
illusion - that's all that death is. It is painful only as long as you cling to illusion.
CHAPTER EIGHT

ENLIGHTENED RELATIONSHIPS
ENTER THE NOW FROM WHEREVER YOU ARE
I always thought that true enlightenment is not possible except through love in a relationship
between a man and a woman. Isn't this what makes us whole again? How can one's life be fu filled
until that happens?

Is that true in your experience? Has this happened to you?
Not yet, but how could it be otherwise? I know that it will happen.

In other words, you are waiting for an event in time to save you. Is this not the core error that
we have been talking about? Salvation is not elsewhere in place or time. It is here and now.
What does that statement mean, "salvation is here and now"? I don't understand it. I don't even
know what salvation means.

Most people pursue physical pleasures or various forms of psychological gratification
because they believe that those things will make them happy or free them from a feeling of
fear or lack. Happiness may be perceived as a heightened sense of aliveness attained through
physical pleasure, or a more secure and more complete sense of self attained through some
form of psychological gratification. This is the search for salvation from a state of
unsatisfactoriness or insufficiency. Invariably, any satisfaction that they obtain is short-lived,
so the condition of satisfaction or fulfillment is usually projected once again onto an
imaginary point away from the here and now. "When I obtain this or am free of that - then I
will be okay." This is the unconscious mind-set that creates the illusion of salvation in the
future.
True salvation is fulfillment, peace, life in all its fullness. It is to be who you are, to feel
within you the good that has no opposite, the joy of Being that depends on nothing outside
itself. It is felt not as a passing experience but as an abiding presence. In theistic language, it
is to "know God" - not as something outside you but as your own innermost essence. True
salvation is to know yourself as an inseparable part of the timeless and formless One Life
from which all that exists derives its being.
True salvation is a state of freedom - from fear, from suffering, from a perceived state of
lack and insufficiency and therefore from all wanting, needing, grasping, and clinging. It is
freedom from compulsive thinking, from negativity, and above all from past and future as a
psychological need. Your mind is telling you that you cannot get there from here. Something
needs to happen, or you need to become this or that before you can be free and fulfilled. It is
saying, in fact, that you need time - that you need to find, sort out, do, achieve, acquire,
become, or understand something before you can be free or complete. You see time as the
means to salvation, whereas in truth it is the greatest obstacle to salvation . You think that you
can't get there from where and who you are at this moment because you are not yet complete or
good enough, but the truth is that here and now is the only point from where you can get there.
You "get" there by realizing that you are there already. You find God the moment you realize
that you don't need to seek God. So there is no only way to salvation: Any condition can be
used, but no particular condition is needed. However, there is only one point of access: the
Now. There can be no salvation away from this moment. You are lonely and without a partner? Enter the Now from there. You are in a relationship? Enter the Now from there.
There is nothing you can ever do or attain that will get you closer to salvation than it
is at this moment. This may be hard to grasp for a mind accustomed to thinking that
everything worthwhile is in the future. Nor can anything that you ever did or that was
done to you in the past prevent you from saying yes to what is and taking your attention
deeply into the Now. You cannot do this in the future. You do it now or not at all.

§
LOVE/HATE RELATIONSHIPS

Unless and until you access the consciousness frequency of presence, all relationships, and
particularly intimate relationships, are deeply flawed and ultimately dysfunctional. They may
seem perfect for a while, such as when you are "in love," but invariably that apparent
perfection gets disrupted as arguments, conflicts, dissatisfaction, and emotional or even
physical violence occur with increasing frequency. It seems that most "love relationships"
become love/hate relationships before long. Love can then turn into savage attack, feelings of
hostility, or complete withdrawal of affection at the flick of a switch. This is considered
normal. The relationship then oscillates for a while, a few months or a few years, between the
polarities of "love" and hate, and it gives you as much pleasure as it gives you pain. It is not
uncommon for couples to become addicted to those cycles. Their drama makes them feel
alive. When a balance between the positive/negative polarities is lost and the negative,
destructive cycles occur with increasing frequency and intensity, which tends to happen
sooner or later, then it will not be long before the relationship finally collapses.
It may appear that if you could only eliminate the negative or destructive cycles, then all
would be well and the relationship would flower beautifully - but alas, this is not possible.
The polarities are mutually interdependent. You cannot have one without the other. The
positive already contains within itself the as yet unmanifested negative. Both are in fact
different aspects of the same dysfunction. I am speaking here of what is commonly called
romantic relationships - not of true love, which has no opposite because it arises from
beyond the mind. Love as a continuous state is as yet very rare - as rare as conscious
human beings. Brief and elusive glimpses of love, however, are possible whenever there
is a gap in the stream of mind.
The negative side of a relationship is, of course, more easily recognizable as
dysfunctional than the positive one. And it is also easier to recognize the source of
negativity in your partner than to see it in yourself. It can manifest in many forms:
possessiveness, jealousy, control, withdrawal and unspoken resentment, the need to be
right, insensitivity and self-absorption, emotional demands and manipulation, the urge to
argue, criticize, judge, blame, or attack, anger, unconscious revenge for past pain inflicted
by a parent, rage and physical violence.
On the positive side, you are "in love" with your partner. This is at first a deeply
satisfying state. You feel intensely alive. Your existence has suddenly become meaningful
because someone needs you, wants you, and makes you feel special, and you do the same
for him or her. When you are together, you feel whole. The feeling can become so intense
that the rest of the world fades into insignificance.
However, you may also have noticed that there is a neediness and a clinging quality
to that intensity. You become addicted to the other person. He or she acts on you like a
drug. You are on a high when the drug is available, but even the possibility or the thought
that he or she might no longer be there for you can lead to jealousy, possessiveness,
attempts at manipulation through emotional blackmail, blaming and accusing - fear of
loss. If the other person does leave you, this can give rise to the most intense hostility or
the most profound grief and despair. In an instant, loving tenderness can turn into a
savage attack or dreadful grief. Where is the love now? Can love change into its opposite
in an instant? Was it love in the first place, or just an addictive grasping and clinging?
ADDICTION AND THE SEARCH FOR WHOLENESS
Why should we become addicted to another person?
The reason why the romantic love relationship is such an intense and universally
sought-after experience is that it seems to offer liberation from a deep-seated state of
fear, need, lack, and incompleteness that is part of the human condition in its
unredeemed and unenlightened state. There is a physical as well as a psychological
dimension to this state.
On the physical level, you are obviously not whole, nor will you ever be: You are
either a man or a woman, which is to say, one-half of the whole. On this level, the
longing for wholeness - the return to oneness - manifests as male-female attraction,
man's need for a woman, woman's need for a man. It is an almost irresistible urge for
union with the opposite energy polarity. The root of this physical urge is a spiritual one:
the longing for an end to duality, a return to the state of wholeness. Sexual union is the
closest you can get to this state on the physical level. This is why it is the most deeply
satisfying experience the physical realm can offer. But sexual union is no more than a
fleeting glimpse of wholeness, an instant of bliss. As long as it is unconsciously sought
as a means of salvation, you are seeking the end of duality on the level of form, where it
cannot be found. You are given a tantalizing glimpse of heaven, but you are not allowed
to dwell there, and find yourself again in a separate body.
On the psychological level, the sense of lack and incompleteness is, if anything, even
greater than on the physical level. As long as you are identified with the mind, you have
an externally derived sense of self. That is to say, you get your sense of who you are from
things that ultimately have nothing to do with who you are: your social role, possessions,
external appearance, successes and failures, belief systems, and so on. This false, mindmade self, the ego, feels vulnerable, insecure, and is always seeking new things to
identify with to give it a feeling that it exists. But nothing is ever enough to give it lasting
fulfillment. Its fear remains; its sense of lack and neediness remains.
But then that special relationship comes along. It seems to be the answer to all the ego's
problems and to meet all its needs. At least this is how it appears at first. All the other things
that you derived your sense of self from before, now become relatively insignificant. You
now have a single focal point that replaces them all, gives meaning to your life, and through
which you define your identity, the person you are "in love" with. You are no longer a
disconnected fragment in an uncaring universe, or so it seems. Your world now has a center.
the loved one. The fact that the center is outside you and that, therefore, you still have an
externally derived sense of self does not seem to matter at first. What matters is that the
underlying feelings of incompleteness, of fear, lack and unfulfillment so characteristic of the
egoic state are no longer there - or are they? Have they dissolved, or do they continue to exist
underneath the happy surface reality?
If in your relationships you experience both "love" and the opposite of love - attack,
emotional violence, and so on - then it is likely that you are confusing ego attachment and
addictive clinging with love. You cannot love your partner one moment and attack him or her
the next. True love has no opposite. If your "love" has an opposite, then it is not love but a
strong ego-need for a more complete and deeper sense of self, a need that the other person
temporarily meets. It is the ego's substitute for salvation, and for a short time it almost does
feel like salvation.
But there comes a point when your partner behaves in ways that fail to meet your needs,
or rather those of your ego. The feelings of fear, pain, and lack that are an intrinsic part of
egoic consciousness but had been covered up by the "love relationship" now resurface. Just
as with every other addiction, you are on a high when the drug is available, but invariably
there comes a time when the drug no longer works for you. When those painful feelings
reappear, you feel them even more strongly than before, and what is more, you now perceive
your partner as the cause of those feelings. This means that you project them outward and
attack the other with all the savage violence that is part of your pain. This attack may awaken
the partner's own pain, and he or she may counter your attack. At this point, the ego is still
unconsciously hoping that its attack or its attempts at manipulation will be sufficient
punishment to induce your partner to change their behavior, so that it can use them again as a
cover-up for your pain.
Every addiction arises from an unconscious refusal to face and move through your own
pain. Every addiction starts with pain and ends with pain. Whatever the substance you are
addicted to - alcohol, food, legal or illegal drugs, or a person - you are using something or
somebody to cover up your pain. That is why, after the initial euphoria has passed, there is so
much unhappiness, so much pain in intimate relationships. They do not cause pain and
unhappiness. They bring out the pain and unhappiness that is already in you. Every addiction
does that. Every addiction reaches a point where it does not work for you anymore, and then
you feel the pain more intensely than ever.
This is one reason why most people are always trying to escape from the present moment
and are seeking some kind of salvation in the future. The first thing that they might encounter
if they focused their attention on the Now is their own pain, and this is what they fear. If they
only knew how easy it is to access in the Now the power of presence that dissolves the past
and its pain, the reality that dissolves the illusion. If they only knew how close they are to
their own reality, how close to God.
Avoidance of relationships in an attempt to avoid pain is not the answer either. The pain
is there anyway. Three failed relationships in as many years are more likely to force you into
awakening than three years on a desert island or shut away in your room. But if you could
bring intense presence into your aloneness, that would work for you too.

§
FROM ADDICTIVE TO ENLIGHTENED RELATIONSHIPS

Can we change an addictive relationship into a true one?

Yes. Being present and intensifying your presence by taking your attention ever more deeply
into the Now. Whether you are living alone or with a partner, this remains the key. For love to
flourish, the light of your presence needs to be strong enough so that you no longer get taken
over by the thinker or the pain-body and mistake them for who you are. To know yourself as
the Being underneath the thinker, the stillness underneath the mental noise, the love and joy
underneath the pain, is freedom, salvation, enlightenment. To disidentify from the pain-body
is to bring presence into the pain and thus transmute it. To disidentify from thinking is to be
the silent watcher of your thoughts and behavior, especially the repetitive patterns of your
mind and the roles played by the ego.
If you stop investing it with "selfness," the mind loses its compulsive quality, which
basically is the compulsion to judge, and so to resist what is, which creates conflict, drama,
and new pain. In fact, the moment that judgment stops through acceptance of what is, you are
free of the mind. You have made room for love, for joy, for peace. First you stop judging
yourself; then you stop judging your partner. The greatest catalyst for change in a relationship
is complete acceptance of your partner as he or she is, without needing to judge or change
them in any way. That immediately takes you beyond ego. All mind games and all addictive
clinging are then over. There are no victims and no perpetrators anymore, no accuser and
accused. This is also the end of all codependency, of being drawn into somebody else's
unconscious pattern and thereby enabling it to continue. You will then either separate - in
love - or move ever more deeply into the Now together - into Being. Can it be that simple?
Yes, it is that simple.
Love is a state of Being. Your love is not outside; it is deep within you. You can never
lose it, and it cannot leave you. It is not dependent on some other body, some external form.
In the stillness of your presence, you can feel your own formless and timeless reality as the
unmanifested life that animates your physical form. You can then feel the same life deep
within every other human and every other creature. You look beyond the veil of form and
separation. This is the realization of oneness. This is love.
What is God? The eternal One Life underneath all the forms of life. What is love? To feel
the presence of that One Life deep within yourself and within all creatures. To be it.
Therefore, all love is the love of God.

§
Love is not selective, just as the light of the sun is not selective. It does not make one person
special. It is not exclusive. Exclusivity is not the love of God but the "love" of ego. However,
the intensity with which true love is felt can vary. There may be one person who reflects your
love back to you more clearly and more intensely than others, and if that person feels the
same toward you, it can be said that you are in a love relationship with him or her. The bond
that connects you with that person is the same bond that connects you with the person sitting
next to you on a bus, or with a bird, a tree, a flower. Only the degree of intensity with which
it is felt differs.
Even in an otherwise addictive relationship, there may be moments when something
more real shines through, something beyond your mutual addictive needs. These are
moments when both your and your partner's mind briefly subside and the pain-body is
temporarily in a dormant state. This may sometimes happen during physical intimacy, or
when you are both witnessing the miracle of childbirth, or in the presence of death, or when
one of you is seriously ill - anything that renders the mind powerless. When this happens,
your Being, which is usually buried underneath the mind, becomes revealed, and it is this that
makes true communication possible.
True communication is communion - the realization of oneness, which is love. Usually,
this is quickly lost again, unless you are able to stay present enough to keep out the mind and
its old patterns. As soon as the mind and mind identification return, you are no longer
yourself but a mental image of yourself, and you start playing games and roles again to get
your ego needs met. You are a human mind again, pretending to be a human being,
interacting with another mind, playing a drama called "love."
Although brief glimpses are possible, love cannot flourish unless you are permanently
free of mind identification and your presence is intense enough to have dissolved the painbody - or you can at least remain present as the watcher. The pain-body cannot then take you
over and so become destructive of love.
RELATIONSHIPS AS SPIRITUAL PRACTICE

As the egoic mode of consciousness and all the social, political, and economic structures that
it created enter the final stage of collapse, the relationships between men and women reflect
the deep state of crisis in which humanity now finds itself. As humans have become
increasingly identified with their mind, most relationships are not rooted in Being and so turn
into a source of pain and become dominated by problems and conflict.
Millions are now living alone or as single parents, unable to establish an intimate
relationship or unwilling to repeat the insane drama of past relationships. Others go from one
relationship to another, from one pleasure-and-pain cycle to another, in search of the elusive
goal of fulfillment through union with the opposite energy polarity. Still others compromise
and continue to be together in a dysfunctional relationship in which negativity prevails, for
the sake of the children or security, through force of habit, fear of being alone, or some other
mutually "beneficial" arrangement, or even through the unconscious addiction to the
excitement of emotional drama and pain.
However, every crisis represents not only danger but also opportunity. If relationships
energize and magnify egoic mind patterns and activate the pain-body, as they do at this time,
why not accept this fact rather than try to escape from it? Why not cooperate with it instead
of avoiding relationships or continuing to pursue the phantom of an ideal partner as an
answer to your problems or a means of feeling fulfilled? The opportunity that is concealed
within every crisis does not manifest until all the facts of any given situation are
acknowledged and fully accepted. As long as you deny them, as long as you try to escape
from them or wish that things were different, the window of opportunity does not open up,
and you remain trapped inside that situation, which will remain the same or deteriorate
further.
With the acknowledgment and acceptance of the facts also comes a degree of freedom
from them. For example, when you know there is disharmony and you hold that "knowing,"
through your knowing a new factor has come in, and the disharmony cannot remain
unchanged. When you know you are not at peace, your knowing creates a still space that
surrounds your nonpeace in a loving and tender embrace and then transmutes your nonpeace
into peace. As far as inner transformation is concerned, there is nothing you can do about it.
You cannot transform yourself, and you certainly cannot transform your partner or anybody
else. All you can do is create a space for transformation to happen, for grace and love to
enter.

§
So whenever your relationship is not working, whenever it brings out the "madness" in you
and in your partner, be glad. What was unconscious is being brought up to the light. It is an
opportunity for salvation. Every moment, hold the knowing of that moment, particularly of
your inner state. If there is anger, know that there is anger. If there is jealousy, defensiveness,
the urge to argue, the need to be right, an inner child demanding love and attention, or emotional
pain of any kind - whatever it is, know the reality of that moment and hold the knowing. The
relationship then becomes your sadhana, your spiritual practice. If you observe unconscious
behavior in your partner, hold it in the loving embrace of your knowing so that you won't
react. Unconsciousness and knowing cannot coexist for long - even if the knowing is only in
the other person and not in the one who is acting out the unconsciousness. The energy form
that lies behind hostility and attack finds the presence of love absolutely intolerable. If you
react at all to your partner's unconsciousness, you become unconscious yourself. But if you
then remember to know your reaction, nothing is lost.
Humanity is under great pressure to evolve because it is our only chance of survival as a
race. This will affect every aspect of your life and close relationships in particular. Never
before have relationships been as problematic and conflict ridden as they are now. As you
may have noticed, they are not here to make you happy or fulfilled. If you continue to pursue
the goal of salvation through a relationship, you will be disillusioned again and again. But if
you accept that the relationship is here to make you conscious instead of happy, then the relationship will offer you salvation, and you will be aligning yourself with the higher
consciousness that wants to be born into this world. For those who hold on to the old
patterns, there will be increasing pain, violence, confusion, and madness.
I suppose that it takes two to make a relationship into a spiritual practice, as you suggest. For
example, my partner is still acting out his old patterns of jealousy and control. I have pointed
this out many times, but he is unable to see it.

How many people does it take to make your life into a spiritual practice? Never mind if your
partner will not cooperate. Sanity - consciousness - can only come into this world through
you. You do not need to wait for the world to become sane, or for somebody else to become
conscious, before you can be enlightened. You may wait forever. Do not accuse each other of
being unconscious. The moment you start to argue, you have identified with a mental
position and are now defending not only that position but also your sense of self. The ego is
in charge. You have become unconscious. At times, it may be appropriate to point out certain
aspects of your partner's behavior. If you are very alert, very present, you can do so without
ego involvement - without blaming, accusing, or making the other wrong.
When your partner behaves unconsciously, relinquish all judgment. Judgment is either to
confuse someone's unconscious behavior with who they are or to project your own
unconsciousness onto another person and mistake that for who they are. To relinquish judgment does not mean that you do not recognize dysfunction and unconsciousness when you
see it. It means "being the knowing" rather than "being the reaction" and the judge. You will
then either be totally free of reaction or you may react and still be the knowing, the space in
which the reaction is watched and allowed to be. Instead of fighting the darkness, you bring
in the light. Instead of reacting to delusion, you see the delusion yet at the same time look
through it. Being the knowing creates a clear space of loving presence that allows all things
and all people to be as they are. No greater catalyst for transformation exists. If you practice
this, your partner cannot stay with you and remain unconscious.
If you both agree that the relationship will be your spiritual practice, so much the better.
You can then express your thoughts and feelings to each other as soon as they occur, or as
soon as a reaction comes up, so that you do not create a time gap in which an unexpressed or
unacknowledged emotion or grievance can fester and grow. Learn to give expression to what
you feel without blaming. Learn to listen to your partner in an open, nondefensive way. Give
your partner space for expressing himself or herself. Be present. Accusing, defending,
attacking - all those patterns that are designed to strengthen or protect the ego or to get its
needs met will then become redundant. Giving space to others - and to yourself - is vital.
Love cannot flourish without it. When you have removed the two factors that are
destructive of relationships: When the pain-body has been transmuted and you are no
longer identified with mind and mental positions, and if your partner has done the same,
you will experience the bliss of the flowering of relationship. Instead of mirroring to each
other your pain and your unconsciousness, instead of satisfying your mutual addictive
ego needs, you will reflect back to each other the love that you feel deep within, the love
that comes with the realization of your oneness with all that is. This is the love that has no
opposite.
If your partner is still identified with the mind and the pain-body while you are
already free, this will represent a major challenge - not to you but to your partner. It is not
easy to live with an enlightened person, or rather it is so easy that the ego finds it
extremely threatening. Remember that the ego needs problems, conflict, and "enemies" to
strengthen the sense of separateness on which its identity depends. The unenlightened
partner's mind will be deeply frustrated because its fixed positions are not resisted, which
means they will become shaky and weak, and there is even the "danger" that they may
collapse altogether, resulting in loss of self. The pain-body is demanding feedback and
not getting it. The need for argument, drama, and conflict is not being met. But beware:
Some people who are unresponsive, withdrawn, insensitive, or cut off from their feelings
may think and try to convince others that they are enlightened, or at least that there is
"nothing wrong" with them and everything wrong with their partner. Men tend to do that
more than women. They may see their female partners as irrational or emotional. But if
you can feel your emotions, you are not far from the radiant inner body just underneath.
If you are mainly in your head, the distance is much greater, and you need to bring
consciousness into the emotional body before you can reach the inner body.
If there isn't an emanation of love and joy, complete presence and openness toward all
beings, then it is not enlightenment. Another indicator is how a person behaves in
difficult or challenging situations or when things "go wrong." If your "enlightenment is
egoic self-delusion, then life will soon give you a challenge that will bring out your
unconsciousness in whatever form - as fear, anger, defensiveness, judgment, depression,
and so on. If you are in a relationship, many of your challenges will come through your
partner. For example, a woman may be challenged by an unresponsive male partner who
lives almost entirely in his head. She will be challenged by his inability to hear her, to
give her attention and space to be, which is due to his lack of presence. The absence of
love in the relationship, which is usually more keenly felt by a woman than a man, will
trigger the woman's pain-body, and through it she will attack her partner - blame,
criticize, make wrong, and so on. This in turn now becomes his challenge. To defend
himself against her pain-body's attack, which he sees as totally unwarranted, he will
become even more deeply entrenched in his mental positions as he justifies, defends
himself or counterattacks. Eventually, this may activate his own pain-body. When both
partners have thus been taken over, a level of deep unconsciousness has been reached, of
emotional violence, savage attack and counterattack. It will not subside until both painbodies have replenished themselves and then enter the dormant stage. Until the next time.
This is only one of an endless number of possible scenarios. Many volumes have
been written, and many more could be written, about the ways in which unconsciousness
is brought out in male-female relationships. But, as I said earlier, once you understand the
root of the dysfunction, you do not need to explore its countless manifestations.
Let's briefly look again at the scenario I have just described. Every challenge that it
contains is actually a disguised opportunity for salvation. At every stage of the unfolding
dysfunctional process, freedom from unconsciousness is possible. For example, the
woman's hostility could become a signal for the man to come out of his mind identified
state, awaken into the Now, become present - instead of becoming even more identified with
his mind, even more unconscious. Instead of "being" the pain-body, the woman could be the
knowing that watches the emotional pain in herself, thus accessing the power of the Now and
initiating the transmutation of the pain. This would remove the compulsive and automatic
outward projection of it. She could then express her feelings to her partner. There is no
guarantee, of course, that he will listen, but it gives him a good chance to become present and
certainly breaks the insane cycle of the involuntary acting out of old mind patterns. If the
woman misses that opportunity, the man could watch his own mental-emotional reaction to
her pain, his own defensiveness, rather than being the reaction. He could then watch his own
pain-body being triggered and thus bring consciousness into his emotions. In this way, a dear
and still space of pure awareness would come into being - the knowing, the silent witness, the
watcher. This awareness does not deny the pain and yet is beyond it. It allows the pain to be
and yet transmutes it at the same time. It accepts everything and transforms everything. A
door would have opened up for her through which she could easily join him in that space.
If you are consistently or at least predominantly present in your relationship, this will be
the greatest challenge for your partner. They will not be able to tolerate your presence for
very long and stay unconscious. If they are ready, they will walk through the door that you
opened for them and join you in that state. If they are not, you will separate like oil and water.
The light is too painful for someone who wants to remain in darkness.
WHY WOMEN ARE CLOSER TO ENLIGHTENMENT
Are the obstacles to enlightenment the same for a man as for a woman?

Yes, but the emphasis is different. Generally speaking, it is easier for a woman to feel and be
in her body, so she is naturally closer to Being and potentially closer to enlightenment than a
man. This is why many ancient cultures instinctively chose female figures or analogies to
represent or describe the formless and transcendental reality. It was often seen as a womb that
gives birth to everything in creation and sustains and nourishes it during its life as form. In
the Tao Te Ching, one of the most ancient and profound books ever written, the Tao, which
could be translated as Being, is described as "infinite, eternally present, the mother of the
universe." Naturally, women are loser to it than men since they virtually "embody" the
Unmanifested. What is more, all creatures and all things must eventually return to the Source.
"All things vanish into the Tao. It alone endures." Since the Source is seen as female, this is
represented as the light and dark sides of the archetypal feminine in psychology and
mythology. The Goddess or Divine Mother has two aspects: She gives life, and she takes life.
When the mind took over and humans lost touch with the reality of their divine essence,
they started to think of God as a male figure. Society became male dominated, and the female
was made subordinate to the male.
I am not suggesting a return to earlier female representations of the divine. Some people
now use the term Goddess instead of God. They are redressing a balance between male and
female that was lost a long time ago, and that is good. But it is still a representation and a
concept, perhaps temporarily useful, just as a map or a signpost is temporarily useful, but
more a hindrance than a help when you are ready to realize the reality beyond all concepts
and images. What does remain true, however, is that the energy frequency of the mind
appears to be essentially male. The mind resists, fights for control, uses, manipulates, attacks,
tries to grasp and possess, and so on. This is why the traditional God is a patriarchal,
controlling authority figure, an often angry man who you should live in fear of, as the Old
Testament suggests. This God is a projection of the human mind.
To go beyond the mind and reconnect with the deeper reality of Being, very different
qualities are needed: surrender, nonjudgment, an openness that allows life to be instead of
resisting it, the capacity to hold all things in the loving embrace of your knowing. All these
qualities are much more closely related to the female principle. Whereas mind-energy is hard
and rigid, Being-energy is soft and yielding and yet infinitely more powerful than mind. The
mind runs our civilization, whereas Being is in charge of all life on our planet and beyond.
Being is the very Intelligence whose visible manifestation is the physical universe. Although
women are potentially closer to it, men can also access it within themselves.
At this time, the vast majority of men as well as women are still in the grip of the mind:
identified with the thinker and the pain-body. This, of course, is what prevents enlightenment
and the flowering of love. As a general rule, the major obstacle for men tends to be the
thinking mind, and the major obstacle for women the pain-body, although in certain
individual cases the opposite may be true, and in others the two factors may be equal.
DISSOLVING THE COLLECTIVE FEMALE PAIN-BODY

Why is the pain-body more of an obstacle for women?
The pain-body usually has a collective as well as a personal aspect. The personal aspect is the
accumulated residue of emotional pain suffered in one's own past. The collective one is the
pain accumulated in the collective human psyche over thousands of years through disease,
torture, war, murder, cruelty, madness, and so on. Everyone's personal pain-body also
partakes of this collective pain-body. There are different strands in the collective pain-body.
For example, certain races or countries in which extreme forms of strife and violence occur
have a heavier collective pain-body than others. Anyone with a strong pain-body and not
enough consciousness to disidentify from it will not only continuously or periodically be
forced to relive their emotional pain but may also easily become either the perpetrator or the
victim of violence, depending on whether their pain-body is predominantly active or passive.
On the other hand, they may also be potentially closer to enlightenment. This potential isn't
necessarily realized, of course, but if you are trapped in a nightmare you will probably be
more strongly motivated to awaken than someone who is just caught in the ups and downs of
an ordinary dream.
Apart from her personal pain-body, every woman has her share in what could be
described as the collective female pain-body - unless she is fully conscious. This consists of
accumulated pain suffered by women partly through male subjugation of the female, through
slavery, exploitation, rape, childbirth, child loss, and so on, over thousands of years. The
emotional or physical pain that for many women precedes and coincides with the menstrual
flow is the pain-body in its collective aspect that awakens from its dormancy at that time,
although it can be triggered at other times too. It restricts the free flow of life energy through
the body, of which menstruation is a physical expression. Let's dwell on this for a moment
and see how it can become an opportunity for enlightenment.
Often a woman is "taken over" by the pain-body at that time. It has an extremely
powerful energetic charge that can easily pull you into unconscious identification with it. You
are then actively possessed by an energy field that occupies your inner space and pretends to
be you - but, of course, is not you at all. It speaks through you, acts through you, thinks
through you. It will create negative situations in your life so that it can feed on the energy. It
wants more pain, in whatever form. I have described this process already. It can be vicious
and destructive. It is pure pain, past pain - and it is not you.
The number of women who are now approaching the fully conscious state already
exceeds that of men and will be growing even faster in the years to come. Men may catch up
with them in the end, but for some considerable time there will be a gap between the consciousness of men and that of women. Women are regaining the function that is their
birthright and, therefore, comes to them more naturally than it does to men: to be a bridge
between the manifested world and the Unmanifested, between physicality and spirit. Your
main task as a woman now is to transmute the pain-body so that it no longer comes between
you and your true self, the essence of who you are. Of course, you also have to deal with the
other obstacle to enlightenment, which is the thinking mind, but the intense presence you
generate when dealing with the pain-body will also free you from identification with the
mind.
The first thing to remember is this: As long as you make an identity for yourself out of
the pain, you cannot become free of it. As long as part of your sense of self is invested in
your emotional pain, you will unconsciously resist or sabotage every attempt that you make
to heal that pain. Why? Quite simply because you want to keep yourself intact, and the pain
has become an essential part of you. This is an unconscious process, and the only way to
overcome it is to make it conscious.
To suddenly see that you are or have been attached to your pain can be quite a shocking
realization. The moment you realize this, you have broken the attachment. The pain-body is
an energy field, almost like an entity, that has become temporarily lodged in your inner space.
It is life energy that has become trapped, energy that is no longer flowing. Of course, the
pain-body is there because of certain things that happened in the past. It is the living past in
you, and if you identify with it, you identify with the past. A victim identity is the belief that
the past is more powerful than the present, which is the opposite of the truth. It is the belief
that other people and what they did to you are responsible for who you are now, for your
emotional pain or your inability to be your true self. The truth is that the only power there is,
is contained within this moment: It is the power of your presence. Once you know that, you
also realize that you are responsible for your inner space now - nobody else is - and that the
past cannot prevail against the power of the Now.

§
So identification prevents you from dealing with the pain-body. Some women who are
already conscious enough to have relinquished their victim identity on the personal level are
still holding on to a collective victim identity. "what men did to women." They are right - and
they are also wrong. They are right inasmuch as the collective female painbody is in large
part due to male violence inflicted on women and repression of the female principle
throughout the planet over millennia. They are wrong if they derive a sense of self from this
fact and thereby keep themselves imprisoned in a collective victim identity. If a woman is
still holding on to anger, resentment, or condemnation, she is holding on to her pain-body.
This may give her a comforting sense of identity, of solidarity with other women, but it is
keeping her in bondage to the past and blocking full access to her essence and true power. If
women exclude themselves from men, that fosters a sense of separation and therefore a
strengthening of the ego. And the stronger the ego, the more distant you are from your true
nature.
So do not use the pain-body to give you an identity. Use it for enlightenment instead.
Transmute it into consciousness. One of the best times for this is during menses. I believe
that, in the years to come, many women will enter the fully conscious state during that time.
Usually, it is a time of unconsciousness for many women, as they are taken over by the
collective female pain-body. Once you have reached a certain level of consciousness,
however, you can reverse this, so instead of becoming unconscious you become more conscious. I have described the basic process already, but let me take you through it again, this
time with special reference to the collective female pain-body.
When you know that the menstrual flow is approaching, before you feel the first signs of
what is commonly called premenstrual tension, the awakening of the collective female painbody, become very alert and inhabit your body as fully as possible. When the first sign
appears, you need to be alert enough to "catch' it before it takes you over. For example, the
first sign may be a sudden strong irritation or a flash of anger, or it may be a purely physical
symptom. Whatever it is, catch it before it can take over your thinking or behavior. This simply means putting the spotlight of your attention on it. If it is an emotion, feel the strong
energy charge behind it. Know that it is the painbody. At the same time, be the knowing; that
is to say, be aware of your conscious presence and feel its power. Any emotion that you take
your presence into will quickly subside and become transmuted. If it is a purely physical
symptom, the attention that you give it will prevent it from turning into an emotion or a
thought. Then continue to be alert and wait for the next sign of the pain-body. When it
appears, catch it again in the same way as before.
Later, when the pain-body has fully awakened from its dormant state, you may
experience considerable turbulence in your inner space for a while, perhaps for several days.
Whatever form this takes, stay present. Give it your complete attention. Watch the turbulence
inside you. Know it is there. Hold the knowing, and be the knowing. Remember do not let the
pain-body use your mind and take over your thinking. Watch it. Feel its energy directly,
inside your body. As you know, full attention means full acceptance.
Through sustained attention and thus acceptance, there comes transmutation. The painbody becomes transformed into radiant consciousness, just as a piece of wood, when placed
in or near a fire, itself is transformed into fire. Menstruation will then become not only a
joyful and fulfilling expression of your womanhood but also a sacred time of transmutation,
when you give birth to a new consciousness. Your true nature then shines forth, both in its
female aspect as the Goddess and in its transcendental aspect as the divine Being that you are
beyond male and female duality.
If your male partner is conscious enough, he can help you with the practice I have just
described by holding the frequency of intense presence particularly at this time. If he stays
present whenever you fall back into unconscious identification with the pain-body, which can
and will happen at first, you will be able to quickly rejoin him in that state. This means that
whenever the pain-body temporarily takes over, whether during menses or at other times,
your partner will not mistake it for who you are. Even if the pain-body attacks him, as it
probably will, he will not react to it as if it were "you," withdraw, or put up some kind of
defense. He will hold the space of intense presence. Nothing else is needed for
transformation. At other times, you will be able to do the same for him or help him reclaim
consciousness from the mind by drawing his attention into the here and now whenever he
becomes identified with his thinking.
In this way, a permanent energy field of a pure and high frequency will arise between
you. No illusion, no pain, no conflict, nothing that is not you, and nothing that is not love can
survive in it. This represents the fulfillment of the divine, transpersonal purpose of your
relationship. It becomes a vortex of consciousness that will draw in many others.

§
GIVE UP THE RELATIONSHIP WITH YOURSELF

When one is fully conscious, would one still have a need for a relationship? Would a man still feel
drawn to a woman? Would a woman still feel incomplete without a man?

Enlightened or not, you are either a man or a woman, so on the level of your form identity
you are not complete. You are one-half of the whole. This incompleteness is felt as malefemale attraction, the pull toward the opposite energy polarity, no matter how conscious you
are. But in that state of inner connectedness, you feel this pull somewhere on the surface or
periphery of your life. Anything that happens to you in that state feels somewhat like that.
The whole world seems like waves or ripples on the surface of a vast and deep ocean. You are
that ocean and, of course, you are also a ripple, but a ripple that has realized its true identity
as the ocean, and compared to that vastness and depth, the world of waves and ripples is not
all that important.
This does not mean that you don't relate deeply to other people or to your partner. In fact,
you can relate deeply only if you are conscious of Being. Coming from Being, you are able to
focus beyond the veil of form. In Being, male and female are one. Your form may continue to
have certain needs, but Being has none. It is already complete and whole. If those needs are
met, that is beautiful, but whether or not they are met makes no difference to your deep inner
state. So it is perfectly possible for an enlightened person, if the need for the male or female
polarity is not met, to feel a sense of lack or incompleteness on the outer level of his or her
being, yet at the same time be totally complete, fulfilled, and at peace within.
In the quest for enlightenment, is being gay a help or a hindrance, or does it not make any
difference?

As you approach adulthood, uncertainty about your sexuality followed by the realization that
you are "different" from others may force you to disidentify from socially conditioned
patterns of thought and behavior. This will automatically raise your level of consciousness
above that of the unconscious majority, whose members unquestioningly take on board all
inherited patterns. In that respect, being gay can be a help. Being an outsider to some extent,
someone who does not "fit in' with others or is rejected by them for whatever reason, makes
life difficult, but it also places you at an advantage as far as enlightenment is concerned. It
takes you out of unconsciousness almost by force.
On the other hand, if you then develop a sense of identity based on your gayness, you
have escaped one trap only to fall into another. You will play roles and games dictated by a
mental image you have of yourself as gay. You will become unconscious. You will become
unreal. Underneath your ego mask, you will become very unhappy. If this happens to you,
being gay will have become a hindrance. But you always get another chance, of course.
Acute unhappiness can be a great awakener.
Is it not true that you need to have a good relationship with yourself and love yourself before you
can have a fulfilling relationship with another person?

If you cannot be at ease with yourself when you are alone, you will seek a relationship to
cover up your unease. You can be sure that the unease will then reappear in some other form
within the relationship, and you will probably hold your partner responsible for it.
All you really need to do is accept this moment fully. You are then at ease in the here and
now and at ease with yourself.
But do you need to have a relationship with yourself at all? Why can't you just be
yourself? When you have a relationship with yourself, you have split yourself into two: "I"
and "myself," subject and object. That mind-created duality is the root cause of all
unnecessary complexity, of all problems and conflict in your life. In the state of
enlightenment, you are yourself - "you" and "yourself" merge into one. You do not judge
yourself, you do not feel sorry for yourself, you are not proud of yourself, you do not love
yourself, you do not hate yourself, and so on. The split caused by self-reflective
consciousness is healed, its curse removed. There is no "self" that you need to protect,
defend, or feed anymore. When you are enlightened, there is one relationship that you no
longer have: the relationship with yourself. Once you have given that up, all your other
relationships will be love relationships.

CHAPTER NINE

BEYOND HAPPINESS AND UNHAPPINESS
THERE IS PEACE
THE HIGHER GOOD BEYOND GOOD AND BAD

Is there a difference between happiness and inner peace?

Yes. Happiness depends on conditions being perceived as positive; inner peace does not.
Is it not possible to attract only positive conditions into our life? If our attitude and our
thinking are always positive, we would manifest only positive events and situations, wouldn't
we?

Do you truly know what is positive and what is negative? Do you have the total picture?
There have been many people for whom limitation, failure, loss, illness, or pain in whatever
form turned out to be their greatest teacher. It taught them to let go of false self-images and
superficial ego-dictated goals and desires. It gave them depth, humility, and compassion. It
made them more real.
Whenever anything negative happens to you, there is a deep lesson concealed within it,
although you may not see it at the time. Even a brief illness or an accident can show you what
is real and unreal in your life, what ultimately matters and what doesn't.
Seen from a higher perspective, conditions are always positive. To be more precise: they
are neither positive nor negative. They are as they are. And when you live in complete
acceptance of what is - which is the only sane way to live - there is no "good" or "bad" in
your life anymore. There is only a higher good - which includes the "bad." Seen from the
perspective of the mind, however, there is good-bad, like-dislike, love-hate. Hence, in the
Book of Genesis, it is said that Adam and Eve were no longer allowed to dwell in "paradise"
when they "ate of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil."
This sounds to me like denial and self-deception. When something dreadful happens to me or
someone close to me - accident, illness, pain of some kind or death - I can pretend that it isn't bad,
but the fact remains that it is bad, so why deny it?

You are not pretending anything. You are allowing it to be as it is, that's all. This "allowing to
be" takes you beyond the mind with its resistance patterns that create the positive-negative
polarities. It is an essential aspect of forgiveness. Forgiveness of the present is even more
important than forgiveness of the past. If you forgive every moment - allow it to be as it is then there will be no accumulation of resentment that needs to be forgiven at some later time.
Remember that we are not talking about happiness here. For example, when a loved one
has just died, or you feel your own death approaching, you cannot be happy. It is impossible.
But you can be at peace. There may be sadness and tears, but provided that you have
relinquished resistance, underneath the sadness you will feel a deep serenity, a stillness, a
sacred presence. This is the emanation of Being, this is inner peace, the good that has no
opposite.
What if it is a situation that I can do something about? How can I allow it to be and change it at the
same time?
Do what you have to do. In the meantime, accept what is. Since mind and resistance are
synonymous, acceptance immediately frees you from mind dominance and thus reconnects
you with Being. As a result, the usual ego motivations for "doing" - fear, greed, control,
defending or feeding the false sense of self - will cease to operate. An intelligence much
greater than the mind is now in charge, and so a different quality of consciousness will flow
into your doing.
"Accept whatever comes to you woven in the pattern of your destiny, for what could
more aptly fit your needs?" This was written 2,000 years ago by Marcus Aurelius, one of those
exceedingly rare humans who possessed worldly power as well as wisdom.
It seems that most people need to experience a great deal of suffering before they will
relinquish resistance and accept - before they will forgive. As soon as they do, one of the
greatest miracles happens: the awakening of Being-consciousness through what appears as
evil, the transmutation of suffering into inner peace. The ultimate effect of all the evil and
suffering in the world is that it will force humans into realizing who they are beyond name
and form. Thus, what we perceive as evil from our limited perspective is actually part of the
higher good that has no opposite. This, however, does not become true for you except
through forgiveness. Until that happens, evil has not been redeemed and therefore remains
evil.
Through forgiveness, which essentially means recognizing the insubstantiality of the past
and allowing the present moment to be as it is, the miracle of transformation happens not
only within but also without. A silent space of intense presence arises both in you and around
you. Whoever or whatever enters that field of consciousness will be affected by it, sometimes
visibly and immediately, sometimes at deeper levels with visible changes appearing at a later
time. You dissolve discord, heal pain, dispel unconsciousness - without doing anything simply by being and holding that frequency of intense presence.

§
THE END OF YOUR LIFE DRAMA

In that state of acceptance and inner peace, even though you may not call it "bad," can anything
still come into your life that would be called "bad" from a perspective of ordinary consciousness?

Most of the so-called bad things that happen in people's lives are due to unconsciousness. They
are self-created, or rather ego-created. I sometimes refer to those things as "drama." When you
are fully conscious, drama does not come into your life anymore. Let me remind you briefly how
the ego operates and how it creates drama.
Ego is the unobserved mind that runs your life when you are not present as the witnessing
consciousness, the watcher. The ego perceives itself as a separate fragment in a hostile universe,
with no real inner connection to any other being, surrounded by other egos which it either sees as
a potential threat or which it will attempt to use for its own ends. The basic ego patterns are
designed to combat its own deep-seated fear and sense of lack. They are resistance, control,
power, greed, defense, attack. Some of the ego's strategies are extremely clever, yet they never
truly solve any of its problems, simply because the ego itself is the problem.
When egos come together, whether in personal relationships or in organizations or
institutions, "bad" things happen sooner or later drama of one kind or another, in the form of
conflict, problems, power struggles, emotional or physical violence, and so on. This includes collective evils such as war, genocide, and exploitation - all due to massed unconsciousness.
Furthermore, many types of illness are caused by the ego's continuous resistance, which creates
restrictions and blockages in the flow of energy through the body. When you reconnect with
Being and are no longer run by your mind, you cease to create those things. You do not create or
participate in drama anymore.
Whenever two or more egos come together, drama of one kind or another ensues. But even if
you live totally alone, you still create your own drama. When you feel sorry for yourself, that's
drama. When you feel guilty or anxious, that's drama. When you let the past or future obscure the
present, you are creating time, psychological time - the stuff out of which drama is made.
Whenever you are not honoring the present moment by allowing it to be, you are creating drama.
Most people are in love with their particular life drama. Their story is their identity. The ego
runs their life. They have their whole sense of self invested in it. Even their - usually unsuccessful
- search for an answer, a solution, or for healing becomes part of it. What they fear and resist
most is the end of their drama. As long as they are their mind, what they fear and resist most is
their own awakening.
When you live in complete acceptance of what is, that is the end of all drama in your life.
Nobody can even have an argument with you, no matter how hard he or she tries. You cannot
have an argument with a fully conscious person. An argument implies identification with your
mind and a mental position, as well as resistance and reaction to the other person's position. The
result is that the polar opposites become mutually energized. These are the mechanics of
unconsciousness. You can still make your point clearly and firmly, but there will be no reactive
force behind it, no defense or attack. So it won’t turn into drama. When you are fully conscious,
you cease to be in conflict. "No one who is at one with himself can even conceive of conflict,"
states A Course in Miracles. This refers not only to conflict with other people but more
fundamentally to conflict within you, which ceases when there is no longer any clash between the
demands and expectations of your mind and what is.
IMPERMANENCE AND THE CYCLES OF LIFE

However, as long as you are in the physical dimension and linked to the collective human psyche,
physical pain - although rare - is still possible. This is not to be confused with suffering, with
mental-emotional pain. All suffering is ego-created and is due to resistance. Also, as long as you
are in this dimension, you are still subject to its cyclical nature and to the law of impermanence
of all things, but you no longer perceive this as "bad" - it just is.
Through allowing the "isness" of all things, a deeper dimension underneath the play of
opposites reveals itself to you as an abiding presence, an unchanging deep stillness, an
uncaused joy beyond good and bad. This is the joy of Being, the peace of God.
On the level of form, there is birth and death, creation and destruction, growth and
dissolution, of seemingly separate forms. This is reflected everywhere: in the life cycle of a
star or a planet, a physical body, a tree, a flower, in the rise and fall of nations, political
systems, civilizations; and in the inevitable cycles of gain and loss in the life of an individual.
There are cycles of success, when things come to you and thrive, and cycles of failure,
when they wither or disintegrate and you have to let them go in order to make room for new
things to arise, or for transformation to happen. If you cling and resist at that point, it means
you are refusing to go with the flow of life, and you will suffer.
It is not true that the up cycle is good and the down cycle bad, except in the mind's
judgment. Growth is usually considered positive, but nothing can grow forever. If growth, of
whatever kind, were to go on and on, it would eventually become monstrous and destructive.
Dissolution is needed for new growth to happen. One cannot exist without the other.
The down cycle is absolutely essential for spiritual realization. You must have failed
deeply on some level or experienced some deep loss or pain to be drawn to the spiritual
dimension. Or perhaps your very success became empty and meaningless and so turned out
to be failure. Failure lies concealed in every success, and success in every failure. In this
world, which is to say on the level of form, everybody "fails" sooner or later, of course, and
every achievement eventually comes to naught. All forms are impermanent.
You can still be active and enjoy manifesting and creating new forms and circumstances,
but you won't be identified with them. You do not need them to give you a sense of self. They
are not your life - only your life situation.
Your physical energy is also subject to cycles. It cannot always be at a peak. There will be
times of low as well as high energy. There will be periods when you are highly active and
creative, but there may also be times when everything seems stagnant, when it seems that you
are not getting anywhere, not achieving anything. A cycle can last for anything from a few
hours to a few years. There are large cycles and small cycles within these large ones. Many
illnesses are created through fighting against the cycles of low energy, which are vital for
regeneration. The compulsion to do, and the tendency to derive your sense of self-worth and
identity from external factors such as achievement, is an inevitable illusion as long as you are
identified with the mind. This makes it hard or impossible for you to accept the low cycles
and allow them to be. Thus, the intelligence of the organism may take over as a selfprotective measure and create an illness in order to force you to stop, so that the necessary
regeneration can take place.
The cyclical nature of the universe is closely linked with the impermanence of all things
and situations. The Buddha made this a central part of his teaching. All conditions are highly
unstable and in constant flux, or, as he put it, impermanence is a characteristic of every
condition, every situation you will ever encounter in your life. It will change, disappear, or no
longer satisfy you. Impermanence is also central to Jesus's teaching: "Do not lay up for
yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust consume and where thieves break in and
steal...."
As long as a condition is judged as "good" by your mind, whether it be a relationship, a
possession, a social role, a place, or your physical body, the mind attaches itself to it and
identifies with it. It makes you happy, makes you feel good about yourself, and it may
become part of who you are or think you are. But nothing lasts in this dimension where moth
and rust consume. Either it ends or it changes, or it may undergo a polarity shift: The same
condition that was good yesterday or last year has suddenly or gradually turned into bad. The
same condition that made you happy, then makes you unhappy. The prosperity of today
becomes the empty consumerism of tomorrow. The happy wedding and honeymoon become
the unhappy divorce or the unhappy coexistence. Or a condition disappears, so its absence
makes you unhappy. When a condition or situation that the mind has attached itself to and
identified with changes or disappears, the mind cannot accept it. It will cling to the
disappearing condition and resist the change. It is almost as if a limb were being torn off your
body.
We sometimes hear of people who have lost all their money or whose reputation has been
ruined committing suicide. Those are the extreme cases. Others, whenever a major loss of
one kind or another occurs, just become deeply unhappy or make themselves ill. They cannot
distinguish between their life and their life situation. I recently read about a famous actress
who died in her eighties. As her beauty started to fade and became ravaged by old age, she
grew desperately unhappy and became a recluse. She, too, had identified with a condition:
her external appearance. First, the condition gave her a happy sense of self, then an unhappy
one. If she had been able to connect with the formless and timeless life within, she could
have watched and allowed the fading of her external form from a place of serenity and peace.
Moreover, her external form would have become increasingly transparent to the light shining
through from her ageless true nature, so her beauty would not really have faded but simply
become transformed into spiritual beauty. However, nobody told her that this is possible. The
most essential kind of knowledge is not yet widely accessible.

§
The Buddha taught that even your happiness is dukkha - a Pali word meaning "suffering"
or "unsatisfactoriness." It is inseparable from its opposite. This means that your happiness
and unhappiness are in fact one. Only the illusion of time separates them.
This is not being negative. It is simply recognizing the nature of things, so that
you don't pursue an illusion for the rest of your life. Nor is it saying that you should no
longer appreciate pleasant or beautiful things or conditions. But to seek something through
them that they cannot give - an identity, a sense of permanency and fulfillment - is a recipe
for frustration and suffering. The whole advertising industry and consumer society would
collapse if people became enlightened and no longer sought to find their identity through
things. The more you seek happiness in this way, the more it will elude you. Nothing out
there will ever satisfy you except temporarily and superficially, but you may need to
experience many disillusionments before you realize that truth. Things and conditions can
give you pleasure, but they will also give you pain. Things and conditions can give you
pleasure, but they cannot give you joy. Nothing can give you joy. Joy is uncaused and arises
from within as the joy of Being. It is an essential part of the inner state of peace, the state that
has been called the peace of God. It is your natural state, not something that you need to work
hard for or struggle to attain.
Many people never realize that there can be no "salvation' in anything they do, possess, or
attain. Those who do realize it often become world-weary and depressed: if nothing can give
you true fulfillment, what is there left to strive for, what is the point in anything? The Old
Testament prophet must have arrived at such a realization when he wrote "I have seen
everything that is done under the sun, and behold, all is vanity and a striving after wind."
When you reach this point, you are one step away from despair - and one step away from
enlightenment.
A Buddhist monk once told me: "All I have learned in the twenty years that I have been a
monk I can sum up in one sentence: All that arises passes away. This I know." What he
meant, of course, was this: I have learned to offer no resistance to what is; I have learned to
allow the present moment to be and to accept the impermanent nature of all things and
conditions. Thus have I found peace.
To offer no resistance to life is to be in a state of grace, ease, and lightness. This state is
then no longer dependent upon things being in a certain way, good or bad. It seems almost
paradoxical, yet when your inner dependency on form is gone, the general conditions of your
life, the outer forms, tend to improve greatly. Things, people, or conditions that you thought
you needed for your happiness now come to you with no struggle or effort on your part, and
you are free to enjoy and appreciate them - while they last. All those things, of course, will
still pass away, cycles will come and go, but with dependency gone there is no fear of loss
anymore. Life flows with ease.
The happiness that is derived from some secondary source is never very deep. It is only a
pale reflection of the joy of Being, the vibrant peace that you find within as you enter the
state of nonresistance. Being takes you beyond the polar opposites of the mind and frees you
from dependency on form. Even if everything were to collapse and crumble all around you,
you would still feel a deep inner core of peace. You may not be happy, but you will be at
peace.

§
USING AND RELINQUISHING NEGATIVITY

All inner resistance is experienced as negativity in one form or another. All negativity is
resistance. In this context, the two words are almost synonymous. Negativity ranges from
irritation or impatience to fierce anger, from a depressed mood or sullen resentment to suicidal despair. Sometimes the resistance triggers the emotional painbody, in which case even a
minor situation may produce intense negativity, such as anger, depression, or deep grief.
The ego believes that through negativity it can manipulate reality and get what it wants. It
believes that through it, it can attract a desirable condition or dissolve an undesirable one. A
Course in Miracles rightly points out that, whenever you are unhappy, there is the unconscious
belief that the unhappiness "buys" you what you want. If "you" - the mind - did not believe
that unhappiness works, why would you create it? The fact is, of course, that negativity does
not work. Instead of attracting a desirable condition, it stops it from arising. Instead of
dissolving an undesirable one, it keeps it in place. It’s only "useful' function is that it
strengthens the ego, and that is why the ego loves it.
Once you have identified with some form of negativity, you do not want to let go, and on
a deeply unconscious level, you do not want positive change. It would threaten your identity
as a depressed, angry, or hard-done-by person. You will then ignore, deny or sabotage the
positive in your life. This is a common phenomenon. It is also insane.
Negativity is totally unnatural. It is a psychic pollutant, and there is a deep link between
the poisoning and destruction of nature and the vast negativity that has accumulated in the
collective human psyche. No other life form on the planet knows negativity, only humans,
just as no other life form violates and poisons the Earth that sustains it. Have you ever seen
an unhappy flower or a stressed oak tree? Have you come across a depressed dolphin, a frog
that has a problem with self-esteem, a cat that cannot relax, or a bird that carries hatred and
resentment? The only animals that may occasionally experience something akin to negativity
or show signs of neurotic behavior are those that live in dose contact with humans and so link
into the human mind and its insanity.
Watch any plant or animal and let it teach you acceptance of what is, surrender to the
Now. Let it teach you Being. Let it teach you integrity - which means to be one, to be
yourself, to be real. Let it teach you how to live and how to die, and how not to make living
and dying into a problem.
I have lived with several Zen masters - all of them cats. Even ducks have taught me
important spiritual lessons. Just watching them is a meditation. How peacefully they float
along, at ease with themselves, totally present in the Now, dignified and perfect as only a
mindless creature can be. Occasionally, however, two ducks will get into a fight - sometimes
for no apparent reason, or because one duck has strayed into another's private space. The
fight usually lasts only for a few seconds, and then the ducks separate, swim off in opposite
directions, and vigorously flap their wings a few times. They then continue to swim on
peacefully as if the fight had never happened. When I observed that for the first time, I
suddenly realized that by flapping their wings they were releasing surplus energy, thus
preventing it from becoming trapped in their body and turning into negativity. This is natural
wisdom, and it is easy for them because they do not have a mind that keeps the past alive
unnecessarily and then builds an identity around it.
Couldn't a negative emotion also contain an important message? For example, if I often feel
depressed, it may be a signal that there is something wrong with my life, and it may force me to
look at my life situation and make some changes. So I need to listen to what the emotion is telling
me and not just dismiss it as negative.

Yes, recurring negative emotions do sometimes contain a message, as do illnesses. But any
changes that you make, whether they have to do with your work, your relationships, or your
surroundings, are ultimately only cosmetic unless they arise out of a change in your level of
consciousness. And as far as that is concerned, it can only mean one thing: becoming more
present. When you have reached a certain degree of presence, you don't need negativity
anymore to tell you what is needed in your life situation. But as long as negativity is there,
use it. Use it as a kind of signal that reminds you to be more present.
How do we stop negativity from arising, and how do we get rid of it once it is there?

As I said, you stop it from arising by being fully present. But don't become discouraged.
There are as yet few people on the planet who can sustain a state of continuous presence,
although some are getting close to it. Soon, I believe, there will be many more.
Whenever you notice that some form of negativity has arisen within you, look on it not as
a failure, but as a helpful signal that is telling you: "Wake up. Get out of your mind. Be
present."
There is a novel by Aldous Huxley called Island, written in his later years when he
became very interested in spiritual teachings. It tells the story of a man shipwrecked on a
remote island cut off from the rest of the world. This island contains a unique civilization.
The unusual thing about it is that its inhabitants, unlike those of the rest of the world, are
actually sane. The first thing that the man notices are the colorful parrots perched in the trees,
and they seem to be constantly croaking the words "Attention. Here and Now. Attention.
Here and Now." We later learn that the islanders taught them these words in order to be
reminded continuously to stay present.
So whenever you feel negativity arising within you, whether caused by an external factor,
a thought, or even nothing in particular that you are aware of, look on it as a voice saying
"Attention. Here and Now. Wake up." Even the slightest irritation is significant and needs to
be acknowledged and looked at; otherwise, there will be a cumulative build-up of unobserved
reactions. As I said before, you may be able to just drop it once you realize that you don't
want to have this energy field inside you and that it serves no purpose. But then make sure
that you drop it completely. If you cannot drop it, just accept that it is there and take your
attention into the feeling, as I pointed out earlier.
As an alternative to dropping a negative reaction, you can make it disappear by imagining
yourself becoming transparent to the external cause of the reaction. I recommend that you
practice it with little, even trivial, things first. Let’s say that you are sitting quietly at home.
Suddenly, there is the penetrating sound of a car alarm from across the street. Irritation arises.
What is the purpose of the irritation? None whatsoever. Why did you create it? You didn't.
The mind did. It was totally automatic, totally unconscious. Why did the mind create it?
Because it holds the unconscious belief that its resistance, which you experience as negativity
or unhappiness in some form, will somehow dissolve the undesirable condition. This, of
course, is a delusion. The resistance that it creates, the irritation or anger in this case, is far
more disturbing than the original cause that it is attempting to dissolve.
All this can be transformed into spiritual practice. Feel yourself becoming transparent, as
it were, without the solidity of a material body. Now allow the noise, or whatever causes a
negative reaction, to pass right through you. It is no longer hitting a solid "wall" inside you.
As I said, practice with little things first. The car alarm, the dog barking, the children
screaming, the traffic jam. Instead of having a wall of resistance inside you that gets
constantly and painfully hit by things that "should not be happening," let everything pass
through you.
Somebody says something to you that is rude or designed to hurt. Instead of going into
unconscious reaction and negativity, such as attack, defense, or withdrawal, you let it pass
right through you. Offer no resistance. It is as if there is nobody there to get hurt anymore.
That is forgiveness. In this way, you become invulnerable. You can still tell that person that
his or her behavior is unacceptable, if that is what you choose to do. But that person no
longer has the power to control your inner state. You are then in your power - not in someone
else's, nor are you run by your mind. Whether it is a car alarm, a rude person, a flood, an
earthquake, or the loss of all your possessions, the resistance mechanism is the same.
I have been practicing meditation, I have been to workshops, I have read many books on
spirituality, I try to be in a state of nonresistance - but if you ask me whether I have found true and
lasting inner peace, my honest answer would have to be "no." Why haven't I found it? What else
can I do?

You are still seeking outside, and you cannot get out of the seeking mode. Maybe the next
workshop will have the answer, maybe that new technique. To you I would say. Don't look
for peace. Don't look for any other state than the one you are in now, otherwise, you will set
up inner conflict and unconscious resistance. Forgive yourself for not being at peace. The
moment you completely accept your non-peace, your non-peace becomes transmuted into
peace. Anything you accept fully will get you there, will take you into peace. This is the
miracle of surrender.

§
You may have heard the phrase "turn the other cheek," which a great teacher of
enlightenment used 2,000 years ago. He was attempting to convey symbolically the secret of
nonresistance and nonreaction. In this statement, as in all his others, he was concerned only
with your inner reality, not with the outer conduct of your life.
Do you know the story of Banzan? Before he became a great Zen master, he spent many
years in the pursuit of enlightenment, but it eluded him. Then one day, as he was walking in
the marketplace, he overheard a conversation between a butcher and his customer. "Give me
the best piece of meat you have," said the customer. And the butcher replied, "Every piece of
meat I have is the best. There is no piece of meat here that is not the best." Upon hearing this,
Banzan became enlightened.
I can see you are waiting for some explanation. When you accept what is, every piece of
meat - every moment - is the best. That is enlightenment.
THE NATURE OF COMPASSION

Having gone beyond the mind-made opposites, you become like a deep lake. The outer
situation of your life and whatever happens there, is the surface of the lake. Sometimes calm,
sometimes windy and rough, according to the cycles and seasons. Deep down, however, the
lake is always undisturbed. You are the whole lake, not just the surface, and you are in touch
with your own depth, which remains absolutely still. You don't resist change by mentally
dinging to any situation. Your inner peace does not depend on it. You abide in Being unchanging, timeless, deathless - and you are no longer dependent for fulfillment or
happiness on the outer world of constantly fluctuating forms. You can enjoy them, play with
them, create new forms, appreciate the beauty of it all. But there will be no need to attach
yourself to any of it.
When you become this detached, does it not mean that you also become remote from other human
beings?

On the contrary. As long as you are unaware of Being, the reality of other humans will elude
you, because you have not found your own. Your mind will like or dislike their form, which
is not just their body but includes their mind as well. True relationship becomes possible only
when there is an awareness of Being. Coming from Being, you will perceive another persons
body and mind as just a screen, as it were, behind which you can feel their true reality, as you
feel yours. So, when confronted with someone else's suffering or unconscious behavior, you
stay present and in touch with Being and are thus able to look beyond the form and feel the
other persons radiant and pure Being through your own. At the level of Being, all suffering is
recognized as an illusion. Suffering is due to identification with form. Miracles of healing
sometimes occur through this realization, by awakening Being-consciousness in others - if
they are ready.
Is that what compassion is?

Yes. Compassion is the awareness of a deep bond between yourself and all creatures. But
there are two sides to compassion, two sides to this bond. On the one hand, since you are still
here as a physical body, you share the vulnerability and mortality of your physical form with
every other human and with every living being. Next time you say "I have nothing in
common with this person," remember that you have a great deal in common: A few years
from now - two years or seventy years, it doesn't make much difference - both of you will
have become rotting corpses, then piles of dust, then nothing at all. This is a sobering and
humbling realization that leaves little room for pride. Is this a negative thought? No, it is a
fact. Why close your eyes to it? In that sense, there is total equality between you and every
other creature.
One of the most powerful spiritual practices is to meditate deeply on the mortality of
physical forms, including your own. This is called: Die before you die. Go into it deeply.
Your physical form is dissolving, is no more. Then a moment comes when all mind-forms or
thoughts also die. Yet you are still there - the divine presence that you are. Radiant, fully
awake. Nothing that was real ever died, only names, forms, and illusions.

§
The realization of this deathless dimension, your true nature, is the other side of
compassion. On a deep feeling-level, you now recognize not only your own immortality but
through your own that of every other creature as well. On the level of form, you share
mortality and the precariousness of existence. On the level of Being, you share eternal,
radiant life. These are the two aspects of compassion. In compassion, the seemingly opposite
feelings of sadness and joy merge into one and become transmuted into a deep inner peace.
This is the peace of God. It is one of the most noble feelings that humans are capable of, and
it has great healing and transformative power. But true compassion, as I have just described
it, is as yet rare. To have deep empathy for the suffering of another being certainly requires a
high degree of consciousness but represents only one side of compassion. It is not complete.
True compassion goes beyond empathy or sympathy. It does not happen until sadness merges
with joy, the joy of Being beyond form, the joy of eternal life.
TOWARD A DIFFERENT ORDER OF REALITY

I don't agree that the body needs to die. I am convinced that we can achieve physical immortality.
We believe in death and that's why the body dies.

The body does not die because you believe in death. The body exists, or seems to, because
you believe in death. Body and death are part of the same illusion, created by the egoic mode
of consciousness, which has no awareness of the Source of life and sees itself as separate and
constantly under threat. So it creates the illusion that you are a body, a dense, physical vehicle
that is constantly under threat.
To perceive yourself as a vulnerable body that was born and a little later dies - that's the
illusion. Body and death: one illusion. You cannot have one without the other. You want to
keep one side of the illusion and get rid of the other, but that is impossible. Either you keep
all of it or you relinquish all of it.
However, you cannot escape from the body, nor do you have to. The body is an incredible
misperception of your true nature. But your true nature is concealed somewhere within that
illusion, not outside it, so the body is still the only point of access to it.
If you saw an angel but mistook it for a stone statue, all you would have to do is adjust
your vision and look more closely at the "stone statue," not start looking somewhere else.
You would then find that there never was a stone statue.
If belief in death creates the body, why does an animal have a body? An animal doesn't have an
ego, and it doesn't believe in death....

But it still dies, or seems to.
Remember that your perception of the world is a reflection of your state of
consciousness. You are not separate from it, and there is no objective world out there.
Every moment, your consciousness creates the world that you inhabit. One of the greatest
insights that has come out of modern physics is that of the unity between the observer and
the observed: the person conducting the experiment - the observing consciousness cannot be separated from the observed phenomena, and a different way of looking causes
the observed phenomena to behave differently. If you believe, on a deep level, in separation and the struggle for survival, then you see that belief reflected all around you and
your perceptions are governed by fear. You inhabit a world of death and of bodies
fighting, killing, and devouring each other.
Nothing is what it seems to be. The world that you create and see through the egoic mind
may seem a very imperfect place, even a vale of tears. But whatever you perceive is only a
kind of symbol, like an image in a dream. It is how your consciousness interprets and interacts with the molecular energy dance of the universe. This energy is the raw material of socalled physical reality. You see it in terms of bodies and birth and death, or as a struggle for
survival. An infinite number of completely different interpretations, completely different
worlds, is possible and, in fact, exists - all depending on the perceiving consciousness. Every
being is a focal point of consciousness, and every such focal point creates its own world,
although all those worlds are interconnected. There is a human world, an ant world, a dolphin
world, and so on. There are countless beings whose consciousness frequency is so different
from yours that you are probably unaware of their existence, as they are of yours. Highly
conscious beings who are aware of their connectedness with the Source and with each other
would inhabit a world that to you would appear as a heavenly realm - and yet all worlds are
ultimately one.
Our collective human world is largely created through the level of consciousness we call
mind. Even within the collective human world there are vast differences, many different
"sub-worlds," depending on the perceivers or creators of their respective worlds. Since all
worlds are interconnected, when collective human consciousness becomes transformed,
nature and the animal kingdom will reflect that transformation. Hence the statement in the
Bible that in the coming age "The lion shall lie down with the lamb." This points to the
possibility of a completely different order of reality.
The world as it appears to us now is, as I said, largely a reflection of the egoic mind. Fear
being an unavoidable consequence of egoic delusion, it is a world dominated by fear. Just as
the images in a dream are symbols of inner states and feelings, so our collective reality is
largely a symbolic expression of fear and of the heavy layers of negativity that have
accumulated in the collective human psyche. We are not separate from our world, so when
the majority of humans become free of egoic delusion, this inner change will affect all of creation. You will literally inhabit a new world. It is a shift in planetary consciousness. The
strange Buddhist saying that every tree and every blade of grass will eventually become
enlightened points to the same truth. According to St. Paul, the whole of creation is waiting
for humans to become enlightened. That is how I interpret his saying that "The created
universe is waiting with eager expectation for God's sons to be revealed." St. Paul goes on to
say that all of creation will become redeemed through this: "Up to the present ... the whole
created universe in all its parts groans as if in the pangs of childbirth."
What is being born is a new consciousness and, as its inevitable reflection, a new world.
This is also foretold in the New Testament Book of Revelation: "Then I saw a new heaven
and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away."
But don't confuse cause and effect. Your primary task is not to seek salvation through
creating a better world, but to awaken out of identification with form. You are then no longer
bound to this world, this level of reality. You can feel your roots in the Unmanifested and so
are free of attachment to the manifested world. You can still enjoy the passing pleasures of
this world, but there is no fear of loss anymore, so you don't need to cling to them. Although
you can enjoy sensory pleasures, the craving for sensory experience is gone, as is the
constant search for fulfillment through psychological gratification, through feeding the ego.
You are in touch with something infinitely greater than any pleasure, greater than any
manifested thing.
In a way, you then don't need the world anymore. You don't even need it to be different
from the way it is.
It is only at this point that you begin to make a real contribution toward bringing about a
better world, toward creating a different order of reality. It is only at this point that you are
able to feel true compassion and to help others at the level of cause. Only those who have
transcended the world can bring about a better world.
You may remember that we talked about the dual nature of true compassion, which is
awareness of a common bond of shared mortality and immortality. At this deep level,
compassion becomes healing in the widest sense. In that state, your healing influence is primarily based not on doing but on being. Everybody you come in contact with will be touched
by your presence and affected by the peace that you emanate, whether they are conscious of it
or not. When you are fully present and people around you manifest unconscious behavior,
you won't feel the need to react to it, so you don't give it any reality. Your peace is so vast and
deep that anything that is not peace disappears into it as if it had never existed. This breaks
the karmic cycle of action and reaction. Animals, trees, flowers will feel your peace and
respond to it. You teach through being, through demonstrating the peace of God. You become
the "light of the world," an emanation of pure consciousness, and so you eliminate suffering
on the level of cause. You eliminate unconsciousness from the world.

§
This doesn't mean that you may not also teach through doing - for example, by pointing out
how to disidentify from the mind, recognize unconscious patterns within oneself, and so on.
But who you are always a more vital teaching and a more powerful transformer of the world
than what you say, and more essential even than what you do. Furthermore, to recognize the
primacy of Being, and thus work on the level of cause, does not exclude the possibility that
your compassion may simultaneously manifest on the level of doing and of effect, by
alleviating suffering whenever you come across it. When a hungry person asks you for bread
and you have some, you will give it. But as you give the bread, even though your interaction
may only be very brief, what really matters is this moment of shared Being, of which the
bread is only a symbol. A deep healing takes place within it. In that moment, there is no
giver, no receiver.
But there shouldn't be any hunger and starvation in the first place. How can we create a better
world without tackling evils such as hunger and violence first?
All evils are the effect of unconsciousness. You can alleviate the effects of unconsciousness,
but you cannot eliminate them unless you eliminate their cause. True change happens within,
not without.
If you feel called upon to alleviate suffering in the world, that is a very noble thing to do,
but remember not to focus exclusively on the outer, otherwise, you will encounter frustration
and despair. Without a profound change in human consciousness, the world's suffering is a
bottomless pit. So don't let your compassion become one-sided. Empathy with someone else's
pain or lack and a desire to help need to be balanced with a deeper realization of the eternal
nature of all life and the ultimate illusion of all pain. Then let your peace flow into whatever
you do and you will be working on the levels of effect and cause simultaneously.
This also applies if you are supporting a movement designed to stop deeply unconscious
humans from destroying themselves, each other, and the planet, or from continuing to inflict
dreadful suffering on other sentient beings. Remember. just as you cannot fight the darkness,
so you cannot fight unconsciousness. If you try to do so, the polar opposites will become
strengthened and more deeply entrenched. You will become identified with one of the
polarities, you will create an "enemy," and so be drawn into unconsciousness yourself. Raise
awareness by disseminating information, or at the most, practice passive resistance. But make
sure that you carry no resistance within, no hatred, no negativity. "Love your enemies," said
Jesus, which, of course, means "have no enemies."
Once you get involved in working on the level of effect, it is all too easy to lose yourself
in it. Stay alert and very, very present. The causal level needs to remain your primary focus,
the teaching of enlightenment your main purpose, and peace your most precious gift to the
world.

THE MEANING OF
SURRENDER

ACCEPTANCE OF THE NOW

You mentioned "surrender" a few times. I don't like that idea. It sounds somewhat fatalistic. If
we always accept the way things are, we are not going to make any effort to improve them. It
seems to me what progress is all about, both in our personal lives and collectively, is not to
accept the limitations of the present but to strive to go beyond them and create something
better. If we hadn't done this, we would still be living in caves. How do you reconcile surrender
with changing things and getting things done?

To some people, surrender may have negative connotations, implying defeat, giving up,
failing to rise to the challenges of life, becoming lethargic, and so on. True surrender,
however, is something entirely different. It does not mean to passively put up with whatever
situation you find yourself in and to do nothing about it. Nor does it mean to cease making
plans or initiating positive action.
Surrender is the simple but profound wisdom of yielding to rather than opposing the flow of
life. The only place where you can experience the flow of life is the Now, so to surrender is to
accept the present moment unconditionally and without reservation. It is to relinquish inner
resistance to what is. Inner resistance is to say "no" to what is, through mental judgment and
emotional negativity. It becomes particularly pronounced when things "go wrong," which
means that there is a gap between the demands or rigid expectations of your mind and what
is. That is the pain gap. If you have lived long enough, you will know that things "go wrong"
quite often. It is precisely at those times that surrender needs to be practiced if you want to
eliminate pain and sorrow from your life. Acceptance of what is immediately frees you from
mind identification and thus reconnects you with Being. Resistance is the mind.
Surrender is a purely inner phenomenon. It does not mean that on the outer level you
cannot take action and change the situation. In fact, it is not the overall situation that you
need to accept when you surrender, but just the tiny segment called the Now.
For example, if you were stuck in the mud somewhere, you wouldn't say. "Okay, I resign
myself to being stuck in the mud." Resignation is not surrender. You don't need to accept an
undesirable or unpleasant life situation. Nor do you need to deceive yourself and say that
there is nothing wrong with being stuck in the mud. No. You recognize fully that you want to
get out of it. You then narrow your attention down to the present moment without mentally
labeling it in any way. This means that there is no judgment of the Now. Therefore, there is
no resistance, no emotional negativity. You accept the "isness" of this moment. Then you take
action and do all that you can to get out of the mud. Such action I call positive action. It is far
more effective than negative action, which arises out of anger, despair, or frustration. Until
you achieve the desired result, you continue to practice surrender by refraining from labeling
the Now.
Let me give you a visual analogy to illustrate the point I am making. You are walking
along a path at night, surrounded by a thick fog. But you have a powerful flashlight that cuts
through the fog and creates a narrow, clear space in front of you. The fog is your life situation, which includes past and future; the flashlight is your conscious presence; the clear space
is the Now.
Non-surrender hardens your psychological form, the shell of the ego, and so creates a
strong sense of separateness. The world around you and people in particular come to be
perceived as threatening. The unconscious compulsion to destroy others through judgment
arises, as does the need to compete and dominate. Even nature becomes your enemy and your
perceptions and interpretations are governed by fear. The mental disease that we call paranoia
is only a slightly more acute form of this normal but dysfunctional state of consciousness.
Not only your psychological form but also your physical form - your body - becomes
hard and rigid through resistance. Tension arises in different parts of the body, and the body
as a whole contracts. The free flow of life energy through the body, which is essential for its
healthy functioning, is greatly restricted. Bodywork and certain forms of physical therapy can
be helpful in restoring this flow, but unless you practice surrender in your everyday life, those
things can only give temporary symptom relief since the cause - the resistance pattern - has
not been dissolved.
There is something within you that remains unaffected by the transient circumstances that
make up your life situation, and only through surrender do you have access to it. It is your
life, your very Being - which exists eternally in the timeless realm of the present. Finding this
life is "the one thing that is needed" that Jesus talked about.
§
If you find your life situation unsatisfactory or even intolerable, it is only by surrendering
first that you can break the unconscious resistance pattern that perpetuates that situation.
Surrender is perfectly compatible with taking action, initiating change or achieving goals.
But in the surrendered state a totally different energy, a different quality, flows into your
doing. Surrender reconnects you with the source-energy of Being, and if your doing is
infused with Being, it becomes a joyful celebration of life energy that takes you more deeply
into the Now. Through nonresistance, the quality of your consciousness and, therefore, the
quality of whatever you are doing or creating is enhanced immeasurably. The results will then
look after themselves and reflect that quality. We could call this "surrendered action." It is not
work as we have known it for thousands of years. As more humans awaken, the word work is
going to disappear from our vocabulary, and perhaps a new word will be created to replace it.
It is the quality of your consciousness at this moment that is the main determinant of what
kind of future you will experience, so to surrender is the most important thing you can do to
bring about positive change. Any action you take is secondary. No truly positive action can
arise out of an unsurrendered state of consciousness.
I can see that if I am in a situation that is unpleasant or unsatisfactory and I completely accept the
moment as it is, there will be no suffering or unhappiness. I will have risen above it. But I still can't
quite see where the energy or motivation for taking action and bringing about change would come
from if there isn't a certain amount of dissatisfaction.

In the state of surrender, you see very clearly what needs to be done, and you take action,
doing one thing at a time and focusing on one thing at a time. Learn from nature: See how
everything gets accomplished and how the miracle of life unfolds without dissatisfaction or
unhappiness. That's why Jesus said: "Look at the lilies, how they grow, they neither toil nor
spin."
If your overall situation is unsatisfactory or unpleasant, separate out this instant and
surrender to what is. That's the flashlight cutting through the fog. Your state of consciousness
then ceases to be controlled by external conditions. You are no longer coming from reaction
and resistance.
Then look at the specifics of the situation. Ask yourself, "Is there anything I can do to
change the situation, improve it, or remove myself from it?" If so, you take appropriate
action. Focus not on the 100 things that you will or may have to do at some future time but
on the one thing that you can do now. This doesn't mean you should not do any planning. It
may well be that planning is the one thing you can do now. But make sure you don't start to
run "mental movies," project yourself into the future, and so lose the Now. Any action you
take may not bear fruit immediately. Until it does - do not resist what is. If there is no action
you can take, and you cannot remove yourself from the situation either, then use the
situation to make you go more deeply into surrender, more deeply into the Now, more deeply
into Being. When you enter this timeless dimension of the present, change often comes
about in strange ways without the need for a great deal of doing on your part. Life becomes
helpful and cooperative. If inner factors such as fear, guilt, or inertia prevented you from
taking action, they will dissolve in the light of your conscious presence.
Do not confuse surrender with an attitude of "I can't be bothered anymore" or "I just don't
care anymore." If you look at it closely, you will find that such an attitude is tainted with
negativity in the form of hidden resentment and so is not surrender at all but masked
resistance. As you surrender, direct your attention inward to check if there is any trace of
resistance left inside you. Be very alert when you do so; otherwise, a pocket of resistance
may continue to hide in some dark corner in the form of a thought or an unacknowledged
emotion.
FROM MIND ENERGY TO SPIRITUAL ENERGY
Letting go of resistance is easier said than done. I still don't see clearly how to let go. If you say it
is by surrendering, the question remains: "How?"

Start by acknowledging that there is resistance. Be there when it happens, when the resistance
arises. Observe how your mind creates it, how it labels the situation, yourself, or others. Look
at the thought process involved. Feel the energy of the emotion. By witnessing the resistance,
you will see that it serves no purpose. By focusing all your attention on the Now, the
unconscious resistance is made conscious, and that is the end of it. You cannot be conscious
and unhappy, conscious and in negativity. Negativity, unhappiness, or suffering in whatever
form means that there is resistance, and resistance is always unconscious.
Surely I can be conscious of my unhappy feelings?

Would you choose unhappiness? If you did not choose it, how did it arise? What is its
purpose? Who is keeping it alive? You say that you are conscious of your unhappy feelings,
but the truth is that you are identified with them and keep the process alive through
compulsive thinking. All that is unconscious. If you were conscious, that is to say totally
present in the Now, all negativity would dissolve almost instantly. It could not survive in your
presence. It can only survive in your absence. Even the pain-body cannot survive for long in
your presence. You keep your unhappiness alive by giving it time. That is its lifeblood.
Remove time through intense present-moment awareness and it dies. But do you want it to
die? Have you truly had enough? Who would you be without it?
Until you practice surrender, the spiritual dimension is something you read about, talk
about, get excited about, write books about, think about, believe in - or don't, as the case may
be. It makes no difference. Not until you surrender does it become a living reality in your life.
When you do, the energy that you emanate and which then runs your life is of a much higher
vibrational frequency than the mind energy that still runs our world - the energy that created
the existing social, political, and economic structures of our civilization, and which also
continuously perpetuates itself through our educational systems and the media. Through
surrender, spiritual energy comes into this world. It creates no suffering for yourself, for other
humans, or any other life form on the planet. Unlike mind energy, it does not pollute the
earth, and it is not subject to the law of polarities, which dictates that nothing can exist
without its opposite, that there can be no good without bad. Those who run on mind energy,
which is still the vast majority of the Earth's population, remain unaware of the existence of
spiritual energy. It belongs to a different order of reality and will create a different world
when a sufficient number of humans enter the surrendered state and so become totally free of
negativity. If the Earth is to survive, this will be the energy of those who inhabit it.
Jesus referred to this energy when he made his famous prophetic statement in the Sermon
on the Mount: "Blessed are the gentle; they shall have the earth for their possession." It is a
silent but intense presence that dissolves the unconscious patterns of the mind. They may still
remain active for a while, but they won't run your life anymore. The external conditions that
were being resisted also tend to shift or dissolve quickly through surrender. It is a powerful
transformer of situations and people. If conditions do not shift immediately, your acceptance
of the Now enables you to rise above them. Either way, you are free.

SURRENDER IN PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
What about people who want to use me, manipulate or control me? Am I to surrender to them?

They are cut off from Being, so they unconsciously attempt to get energy and power from
you. It is true that only an unconscious person will try to use or manipulate others, but it is
equally true that only an unconscious person can be used and manipulated. If you resist or
fight unconscious behavior in others, you become unconscious yourself. But surrender
doesn't mean that you allow yourself to be used by unconscious people. Not at all. It is
perfectly possible to say "no" firmly and dearly to a person or to walk away from a situation
and be in a state of complete inner nonresistance at the same time. When you say "no" to a
person or a situation, let it come not from reaction but from insight, from a clear realization
of what is right or not right for you at that moment. Let it be a nonreactive "no," a highquality "no," a "no" that is free of all negativity and so creates no further suffering.
I am in a situation at work that is unpleasant. I have tried to surrender to it, but I find it
impossible. A lot of resistance keeps coming up.

If you cannot surrender, take action immediately. Speak up or do something to bring about a
change in the situation - or remove yourself from it. Take responsibility for your life. Do not
pollute your beautiful, radiant inner Being nor the Earth with negativity. Do not give
unhappiness in any form whatsoever a dwelling place inside you.
If you cannot take action, for example if you are in prison, then you have two choices
left: resistance or surrender. Bondage or inner freedom from external conditions. Suffering or
inner peace.
Is nonresistance also to be practiced in the external conduct of our lives, such as nonresistance
to violence, or is it something that just concerns our inner life?

You only need to be concerned with the inner aspect. That is primary. Of course, that will also
transform the conduct of your outer life, your relationships, and so on.
Your relationships will be changed profoundly by surrender. If you can never accept what
is, by implication you will not be able to accept anybody the way they are. You will judge,
criticize, label, reject, or attempt to change people. Furthermore, if you continuously make
the Now into a means to an end in the future, you will also make every person you encounter
or relate with into a means to an end. The relationship - the human being - is then of
secondary importance to you, or of no importance at all. What you can get out of the relationship is primary - be it material gain, a sense of power, physical pleasure, or some form of
ego gratification.
Let me illustrate how surrender can work in relationships. When you become involved in
an argument or some conflict situation, perhaps with a partner or someone close to you, start
by observing how defensive you become as your own position is attacked, or feel the force of
your own aggression as you attack the other person's position. Observe the attachment to
your views and opinions. Feel the mental-emotional energy behind your need to be right and
make the other person wrong. That's the energy of the egoic mind. You make it conscious by
acknowledging it, by feeling it as fully as possible. Then one day, in the middle of an
argument, you will suddenly realize that you have a choice, and you may decide to drop your
own reaction - just to see what happens. You surrender. I don't mean dropping the reaction
just verbally by saying "Okay, you are right," with a look on your face that says, "I am above
all this childish unconsciousness." That's just displacing the resistance to another level, with
the egoic mind still in charge, claiming superiority. I am speaking of letting go of the entire
mental-emotional energy field inside you that was fighting for power.
The ego is cunning, so you have to be very alert, very present, and totally honest with
yourself to see whether you have truly relinquished your identification with a mental position
and so freed yourself from your mind. If you suddenly feel very light, clear and deeply at
peace, that is an unmistakable sign that you have truly surrendered. Then observe what
happens to the other person's mental position as you no longer energize it through resistance.
When identification with mental positions is out of the way, true communication begins.
What about nonresistance in the face of violence, aggression, and the like?

Nonresistance doesn't necessarily mean doing nothing. All it means is that any "doing"
becomes nonreactive. Remember the deep wisdom underlying the practice of Eastern martial
arts: don't resist the opponent's force. Yield to overcome.
Having said that, "doing nothing" when you are in a state of intense presence is a very
powerful transformer and healer of situations and people. In Taoism, there is a term called wu
wei, which is usually translated as "actionless activity" or "sitting quietly doing nothing." In
ancient China, this was regarded as one of the highest achievements or virtues. It is radically
different from inactivity in the ordinary state of consciousness, or rather unconsciousness,
which stems from fear, inertia, or indecision. The real "doing nothing" implies inner
nonresistance and intense alertness.
On the other hand, if action is required, you will no longer react from your conditioned
mind, but you will respond to the situation out of your conscious presence. In that state, your
mind is free of concepts, including the concept of nonviolence. So who can predict what you
will do?
The ego believes that in your resistance lies your strength, whereas in truth resistance
cuts you off from Being, the only place of true power. Resistance is weakness and fear
masquerading as strength. What the ego sees as weakness is your Being in its purity,
innocence, and power. What it sees as strength is weakness. So the ego exists in a continuous
resistance-mode and plays counterfeit roles to cover up your "weakness," which in truth is
your power.
Until there is surrender, unconscious role-playing constitutes a large part of human
interaction. In surrender, you no longer need ego defenses and false masks. You become very
simple, very real. "That's dangerous," says the ego. "You'll get hurt. You'll become
vulnerable." What the ego doesn't know, of course, is that only through the letting go of
resistance, through becoming "vulnerable," can you discover your true and essential
invulnerability.
TRANSFORMING ILLNESS INTO ENLIGHTENMENT
If someone is seriously ill and completely accepts their condition and surrenders to the illness,
would they not have given up their will to get back to health? The determination to fight the
illness would not be there any more, would it?

Surrender is inner acceptance of what is without any reservations. We are talking about your
life - this instant - not the conditions or circumstances of your life, not what I call your life
situation. We have spoken about this already.
With regard to illness, this is what it means. Illness is part of your life situation. As such,
it has a past and a future. Past and future form an uninterrupted continuum, unless the
redeeming power of the Now is activated through your conscious presence. As you know,
underneath the various conditions that make up your life situation, which exists in time, there
is something deeper, more essential: your Life, your very Being in the timeless Now.
As there are no problems in the Now, there is no illness either. The belief in a label that
someone attaches to your condition keeps the condition in place, empowers it, and makes a
seemingly solid reality out of a temporary imbalance. It gives it not only reality and solidity
but also a continuity in time that it did not have before. By focusing on this instant and
refraining from labeling it mentally, illness is reduced to one or several of these factors:
physical pain, weakness, discomfort, or disability. That is what you surrender to - now. You
do not surrender to the idea of "illness." Allow the suffering to force you into the present
moment, into a state of intense conscious presence. Use it for enlightenment.
Surrender does not transform what is, at least not directly. Surrender transforms you.
When you are transformed, your whole world is transformed, because the world is only a
reflection. We spoke about this earlier.
If you looked in the mirror and did not like what you saw, you would have to be mad to
attack the image in the mirror. That is precisely what you do when you are in a state of
nonacceptance. And, of course, if you attack the image, it attacks you back. If you accept the
image, no matter what it is, if you become friendly toward it, it cannot not become friendly
toward you. This is how you change the world.
Illness is not the problem. You are the problem - as long as the egoic mind is in control.
When you are ill or disabled, do not feel that you have failed in some way, do not feel guilty.
Do not blame life for treating you unfairly, but do not blame yourself either. All that is
resistance. If you have a major illness, use it for enlightenment. Anything "bad" that happens
in your life - use it for enlightenment. Withdraw time from the illness. Do not give it any
past or future. Let it force you into intense present-moment awareness - and see what
happens.
Become an alchemist. Transmute base metal into gold, suffering into consciousness,
disaster into enlightenment.
Are you seriously ill and feeling angry now about what I have just said? Then that is a
clear sign that the illness has become part of your sense of self and that you are now
protecting your identity - as well as protecting the illness. The condition that is labeled
"illness" has nothing to do with who you truly are.
WHEN DISASTER STRIKES

As far as the still unconscious majority of the population is concerned, only a critical limitsituation has the potential to crack the hard shell of the ego and force them into surrender and
so into the awakened state. A limit-situation arises when through some disaster, drastic
upheaval, deep loss, or suffering your whole world is shattered and doesn't make sense
anymore. It is an encounter with death, be it physical or psychological. The egoic mind, the
creator of this world, collapses. Out of the ashes of the old world, a new world can then come
into being.
There is no guarantee, of course, that even a limit-situation will do it, but the potential is
always there. Some people's resistance to what is even intensifies in such a situation, and so it
becomes a descent into hell. In others, there may only be partial surrender, but even that will
give them a certain depth and serenity that were not there before. Parts of the ego shell break
off, and this allows small amounts of the radiance and peace that lie beyond the mind to shine
through.
Limit-situations have produced many miracles. There have been murderers in death row
waiting for execution who, in the last few hours of their lives, experienced the egoless state
and the deep joy and peace that come with it. The inner resistance to the situation they
found themselves in became so intense as to produce unbearable suffering, and there was
nowhere to run and nothing to do to escape it, not even a mind-projected future. So they were
forced into complete acceptance of the unacceptable. They were forced into surrender. In this
way, they were able to enter the state of grace with which comes redemption: complete
release from the past. Of course, it is not really the limit-situation that makes room for the
miracle of grace and redemption but the act of surrender.
So whenever any kind of disaster strikes, or something goes seriously "wrong" - illness,
disability, loss of home or fortune or of a socially defined identity, break-up of a close
relationship, death or suffering of a loved one, or your own impending death - know that
there is another side to it, that you are just one step away from something incredible: a
complete alchemical transmutation of the base metal of pain and suffering into gold. That one
step is called surrender.
I do not mean to say that you will become happy in such a situation. You will not. But
fear and pain will become transmuted into an inner peace and serenity that come from a very
deep place - from the Unmanifested itself. It is "the peace of God, which passes all
understanding." Compared to that, happiness is quite a shallow thing. With this radiant peace
comes the realization - not on the level of mind but within the depth of your Being - that you
are indestructible, immortal. This is not a belief. It is absolute certainty that needs no external
evidence or proof from some secondary source.
TRANSFORMING SUFFERING INTO PEACE

I read about a stoic philosopher in ancient Greece who, when he was told that his son had
died in an accident, replied, "I knew he was not immortal." Is that surrender? If it is, I don't
want it. There are some situations in which surrender seems unnatural and inhuman.

Being cut off from your feelings is not surrender. But we don't know what his inner state
was when he said those words. In certain extreme situations, it may still be impossible for
you to accept the Now. But you always get a second chance at surrender.
Your first chance is to surrender each moment to the reality of that moment. Knowing
that what is cannot be undone - because it already is - you say yes to what is or accept what
isn't. Then you do what you have to do, whatever the situation requires. If you abide in this
state of acceptance, you create no more negativity, no more suffering, no more unhappiness.
You then live in a state of nonresistance, a state of grace and lightness, free of struggle.
Whenever you are unable to do that, whenever you miss that chance - either because you
are not generating enough conscious presence to prevent some habitual and unconscious
resistance pattern from arising, or because the condition is so extreme as to be absolutely
unacceptable to you - then you are creating some form of pain, some form of suffering. It
may look as if the situation is creating the suffering, but ultimately this is not so - your
resistance is.
Now here is your second chance at surrender. If you cannot accept what is outside, then
accept what is inside. If you cannot accept the external condition, accept the internal
condition. This means: Do not resist the pain. Allow it to be there. Surrender to the grief,
despair, fear, loneliness, or whatever form the suffering takes. Witness it without labeling it
mentally. Embrace it. Then see how the miracle of surrender transmutes deep suffering into
deep peace. This is your crucifixion. Let it become your resurrection and ascension.
I do not see how one can surrender to suffering. As you yourself pointed out, suffering is nonsurrender. How could you surrender to nonsurrender?

Forget about surrender for a moment. When your pain is deep, all talk of surrender will
probably seem futile and meaningless anyway. When your pain is deep, you will likely have a
strong urge to escape from it rather than surrender to it. You don't want to feel what you feel.
What could be more normal? But there is no escape, no way out. There are many pseudo
escapes - work, drink, drugs, anger, projection, suppression, and so on - but they don't free
you from the pain. Suffering does not diminish in intensity when you make it unconscious.
When you deny emotional pain, everything you do or think as well as your relationships
become contaminated with it. You broadcast it, so to speak, as the energy you emanate, and
others will pick it up subliminally. If they are unconscious, they may even feel compelled to
attack or hurt you in some way, or you may hurt them in an unconscious projection of your
pain. You attract and manifest whatever corresponds to your inner state.
When there is no way out, there is still always a way through. So don't turn away from the
pain. Face it. Feel it fully. Feel it - don't think about it! Express it if necessary, but don't create
a script in your mind around it. Give all your attention to the feeling, not to the person, event,
or situation that seems to have caused it. Don't let the mind use the pain to create a victim
identity for yourself out of it. Feeling sorry for yourself and telling others your story will
keep you stuck in suffering. Since it is impossible to get away from the feeling, the only
possibility of change is to move into it; otherwise, nothing will shift. So give your complete
attention to what you feel, and refrain from mentally labeling it. As you go into the feeling,
be intensely alert. At first, it may seem like a dark and terrifying place, and when the urge to
turn away from it comes, observe it but don't act on it. Keep putting your attention on the
pain, keep feeling the grief, the fear, the dread, the loneliness, whatever it is. Stay alert, stay
present - present with your whole Being, with every cell of your body. As you do so, you are
bringing a light into this darkness. This is the flame of your consciousness.
At this stage, you don't need to be concerned with surrender anymore. It has happened
already. How? Full attention is full acceptance, is surrender. By giving full attention, you use
the power of the Now, which is the power of your presence. No hidden pocket of resistance
can survive in it. Presence removes time. Without time, no suffering, no negativity, can
survive.
The acceptance of suffering is a journey into death. Facing deep pain, allowing it to be,
taking your attention into it, is to enter death consciously. When you have died this death, you
realize that there is no death - and there is nothing to fear. Only the ego dies. Imagine a ray of
sunlight that has forgotten it is an inseparable part of the sun and deludes itself into believing
it has to fight for survival and create and cling to an identity other than the sun. Would the
death of this delusion not be incredibly liberating?
Do you want an easy death? Would you rather die without pain, without agony? Then die
to the past every moment, and let the light of your presence shine away the heavy, timebound self you thought of as "you."

§
THE WAY OF THE CROSS

There are many accounts of people who say they have found God through their deep suffering,
and there is the Christian expression "the way of the cross," which I suppose points to the same
thing.

We are concerned with nothing else here.
Strictly speaking, they did not find God through their suffering, because suffering
implies resistance. They found God through surrender, through total acceptance of what is,
into which they were forced by their intense suffering. They must have realized on some
level that their pain was self-created.
How do you equate surrender with finding God?

Since resistance is inseparable from the mind, relinquishment of resistance - surrender - is
the end of the mind as your master, the impostor pretending to be "you," the false god. All
judgment and all negativity dissolve. The realm of Being, which had been obscured by the
mind, then opens up. Suddenly, a great stillness arises within you, an unfathomable sense of
peace. And within that peace, there is great joy. And within that joy, there is love. And at the
innermost core, there is the sacred, the immeasurable, That which cannot be named.
I don't call it finding God, because how can you find that which was never lost, the very
life that you are? The word God is limiting not only because of thousands of years of
misperception and misuse, but also because it implies an entity other than you. God is Being
itself, not a being. There can be no subject-object relationship here, no duality, no you and
God. God-realization is the most natural thing there is. The amazing and incomprehensible
fact is not that you can become conscious of God but that you are not conscious of God.
The way of the cross that you mentioned is the old way to enlightenment, and until
recently it was the only way. But don't dismiss it or underestimate its efficacy. It still works.
The way of the cross is a complete reversal. It means that the worst thing in your life,
your cross, turns into the best thing that ever happened to you, by forcing you into surrender,
into "death," forcing you to become as nothing, to become as God - because God, too, is nothing.
At this time, as far as the unconscious majority of humans is concerned, the way of the
cross is still the only way. They will only awaken through further suffering, and
enlightenment as a collective phenomenon will be predictably preceded by vast upheavals.
This process reflects the workings of certain universal laws that govern the growth of
consciousness and thus was foreseen by some seers. It is described, among other places, in
the Book of Revelation or Apocalypse, though cloaked in obscure and sometimes
impenetrable symbology. This suffering is inflicted not by God but by humans on themselves
and on each other as well as by certain defensive measures that the Earth, which is a living,
intelligent organism, is going to take to protect herself from the onslaught of human madness.
However, there is a growing number of humans alive today whose consciousness is
sufficiently evolved not to need any more suffering before the realization of enlightenment.
You may be one of them.
Enlightenment through suffering - the way of the cross - means to be forced into the
kingdom of heaven kicking and screaming. You finally surrender because you can’t stand the
pain anymore, but the pain could go on for a long time until this happens. Enlightenment
consciously chosen means to relinquish your attachment to past and future and to make the
Now the main focus of your life. It means choosing to dwell in the state of presence rather
than in time. It means saying yes to what is. You then don't need pain anymore. How much
more time do you think you will need before you are able to say "I will create no more pain,
no more suffering?" How much more pain do you need before you can make that choice?
If you think that you need more time, you will get more time - and more pain. Time and
pain are inseparable.
THE POWER TO CHOOSE

What about all those people who, it seems, actually want to suffer? I have a friend whose partner is
physically abusive toward her, and her previous relationship was of a similar kind. Why does she
choose such men, and why is she refusing to get out of that situation now? Why do so many people
actually choose pain?

I know that the word choose is a favorite New Age term, but it isn't entirely accurate in this
context. It is misleading to say that somebody "chose" a dysfunctional relationship or any
other negative situation in his or her life. Choice implies consciousness - a high degree of
consciousness. Without it, you have no choice. Choice begins the moment you disidentify
from the mind and its conditioned patterns, the moment you become present. Until you reach
that point, you are unconscious, spiritually speaking. This means that you are compelled
to think, feel, and act in certain ways according to the conditioning of your mind. That is why
Jesus said: "Forgive them, for they know not what they do." This is not related to intelligence
in the conventional sense of the word. I have met many highly intelligent and educated
people who were also completely unconscious, which is to say completely identified with
their mind. In fact, if mental development and increased knowledge are not counterbalanced
by a corresponding growth in consciousness, the potential for unhappiness and disaster is
very great.
Your friend is stuck in a relationship with an abusive partner, and not for the first time.
Why? No choice. The mind, conditioned as it is by the past, always seeks to re-create what it
knows and is familiar with. Even if it is painful, at least it is familiar. The mind always
adheres to the known. The unknown is dangerous because it has no control over it. That's
why the mind dislikes and ignores the present moment. Present-moment awareness creates a
gap not only in the stream of mind but also in the past-future continuum. Nothing truly new
and creative can come into this world except through that gap, that clear space of infinite
possibility.
So your friend, being identified with her mind, may be re-creating a pattern learned in the
past in which intimacy and abuse are inseparably linked. Alternatively, she may be acting out
a mind pattern learned in early childhood according to which she is unworthy and deserves to
be punished. It is possible, too, that she lives a large part of her life through the pain-body,
which always seeks more pain on which to feed. Her partner has his own unconscious
patterns, which complement hers. Of course her situation is self-created, but who or what is
the self that is doing the creating? A mental-emotional pattern from the past, no more. Why
make a self out of it? If you tell her that she has chosen her condition or situation, you are
reinforcing her state of mind identification. But is her mind pattern who she is? Is it her self?
Is her true identity derived from the past? Show your friend how to be the observing presence
behind her thoughts and her emotions. Tell her about the pain-body and how to free herself
from it. Teach her the art of inner-body awareness. Demonstrate to her the meaning of
presence. As soon as she is able to access the power of the Now, and thereby break through
her conditioned past, she will have a choice.
Nobody chooses dysfunction, conflict, pain. Nobody chooses insanity. They happen
because there is not enough presence in you to dissolve the past, not enough light to dispel
the darkness. You are not fully here. You have not quite woken up yet. In the meantime, the
conditioned mind is running your life.
Similarly, if you are one of the many people who have an issue with their parents, if you
still harbor resentment about something they did or did not do, then you still believe that they
had a choice - that they could have acted differently. It always looks as if people had a choice,
but that is an illusion. As long as your mind with its conditioned patterns runs your life, as
long as you are your mind, what choice do you have? None. You are not even there. The
mind-identified state is severely dysfunctional. It is a form of insanity. Almost everyone is
suffering from this illness in varying degrees. The moment you realize this, there can be no
more resentment. How can you resent someone's illness? The only appropriate response is
compassion.
So that means nobody is responsible for what they do? I don't like that idea.
If you are run by your mind, although you have no choice you will still suffer the
consequences of your unconsciousness, and you will create further suffering. You will bear
the burden of fear, conflict, problems, and pain. The suffering thus created will eventually
force you out of your unconscious state.
What you say about choice also applies to forgiveness, I suppose. You need to be fully
conscious and surrender before you can forgive.
"Forgiveness" is a term that has been in use for 2,000 years, but most people have a very
limited view of what it means. You cannot truly forgive yourself or others as long as you
derive your sense of self from the past. Only through accessing the power of the Now, which
is your own power, can there be true forgiveness. This renders the past powerless, and you
realize deeply that nothing you ever did or that was ever done to you could touch even in the
slightest the radiant essence of who you are. The whole concept of forgiveness then becomes
unnecessary.
And how do I get to that point of realization?
When you surrender to what is and so become fully present, the past ceases to have any
power. You do not need it anymore. Presence is the key. The Now is the key.
How will I know when I have surrendered?
When you no longer need to ask the question.
Awaken the Giant Within
Anthony Robbins

DREAMS OF DESTINY

BENJAMIN DISRAELI
We all have dreams... We all want to believe deep down in our souls that we have a special gift, that
we can make a difference, that we can touch others in a special way, and that we can make the world
a better place. At one time in our lives, we all had a vision for the quality of life that we desire and

1

capricious launisch
deserve. Yet, for many of us, those dreams have become so shrouded2 in the frustrations and routines
of daily life that we no longer even make an effort to accomplish3 them. For far too many, the dream
has dissipated4—and with it, so has the will to shape our destinies. Many have lost that sense of
certainty that creates the winner's edge. My life's quest has been to restore the dream and to make it
real, to get each of us to remember and use the unlimited power that lies sleeping within us all.
I´ll never forget the day it really hit me that I was truly living my dream. I was flying my jet
helicopter from a business meeting in Los Angeles, traveling to Orange County on the way to one of
my seminars. As I flew over the city of Glendale, I suddenly recognized a large building, and I stopped
the helicopter and hovered above it. As I looked down, I realized this was the building that I'd worked
in as a janitor5 a mere twelve years ago!
In those days, I had been concerned whether my 1960 Volkswagen would hang together for the
30-minute trip to work, my life had been focused on how I was going to survive; I had felt fearful and
alone. But that day, as I hovered there in the sky, I thought, "What a difference a decade can make!" I
did have dreams back then, but at the time, it seemed they'd never be realized. Today, though, I've
come to believe that all my past failure and frustration were actually laying the foundation for the
understandings that have created the new level of living I now enjoy. As I continued my flight south
along the coastal route, I spotted dolphins playing with the surfers in the waves below. It's a sight that
my wife, Becky, and I treasure as one of life's special gifts. Finally, I reached Irvine. Looking below, I
was a little disturbed when I saw that the off ramp to my seminar was jammed with bumper-tobumper traffic for more than a mile. 1 thought to myself, "Boy, I hope whatever else is going on
tonight gets started soon so that the people coming to my seminar arrive on time."
But as I descended to the helipad, I began to see a new picture: thousands of people being held
back by security where I was just about to land. Suddenly I began to grasp the reality. The traffic jam
had been caused by people going to my event! Although we had expected approximately 2,000
attendees, I was facing a crowd of 7,000—in an auditorium that would hold only 5,000! When I walked
into the arena from the landing pad, I was surrounded by hundreds of people who wanted to give me a
hug or tell me how my work had positively impacted their lives.
The stories they shared with me were incredible. One mother introduced me to her son who had
been labeled "hyperactive" and "learning disabled." Utilizing the principles of state management
taught in this book, she was not only able to get him off the drug Ritalin, but they had also since been
transferred to California where her son had been retested and evaluated at the level of genius! You
should have seen his face as she shared with me his new label. A gentleman talked about how he had
freed himself from cocaine using some of the Success Conditioning techniques you'll learn in this
book. A couple in their mid-fifties shared with me that, after fifteen years of marriage, they had been
on the brink of divorce until they learned about personal rules. A salesman told me how his monthly
income had jumped from $2,000 to over $12,000 in a mere six months, and an entrepreneur related
that he had increased corporate revenues by over $3 million in eighteen months by applying the

2
3
4
5

shroud 1. Leichentuch; 2. übertragen hüllen
accomplish erreichen; leisten
dissipate (sich) zerstreuen; verschwenden
janitor Am. Hausmeister (in)
principles of quality questions and emotional management. A lovely young woman showed me a
picture of her former self, having lost fifty-two pounds by applying the principles of leverage that are
detailed in this book.
I was touched so deeply by the emotions in that room that I got choked6 up, and at first I
couldn't speak. As I looked out on my audience and saw 5,000 smiling, cheering, loving faces, in that
moment I realized that I am living my dream! What a feeling to know that beyond a shadow of a doubt
I had the information, strategies, philosophies, and skills that could assist any one of these people in
empowering themselves to make the changes they desired most! A flood of images and emotions
flowed over me. I began to remember an experience I'd had only a few years before, sitting in my
400-square-foot bachelor apartment in Venice, California, all alone and crying as I listened to the lyrics
of a Neil Diamond song: "I am, I said, to no one there. And no one heard at all, not even the chair. I
am, I cried. I am, said I. And I am lost, and I can't even say why, leavin' me lonely still." I
remembered feeling like my life didn't matter, as if the events of the world were controlling me. I also
remember the moment my life changed, the moment I finally said, "I've had it! I know I'm much more
than I'm demonstrating mentally, emotionally, and physically in my life." I made a decision in that
moment which was to alter my life forever. I decided to change virtually7 every aspect of my life.
I decided I would never again settle for less than I could be. Who would have guessed that this
decision would bring me to such an incredible moment?
I gave my all at the seminar that night, and when I left the auditorium, crowds of people
followed me to the helicopter to see me off. To say I was deeply moved by the experience would be an
understatement. A tear slid down my cheek as I thanked my Creator for these wonderful gifts. As I
lifted off the grass and ascended into the moonlight, I had to pinch myself. Could this be real? Am I
the same guy who eight years ago was struggling, frustrated, feeling alone and incapable of making
my life work? Fat, broke, and wondering if I could even survive? How could a young kid like me with
nothing but a high school education have created such dramatic changes?
My answer is simple: I learned to harness the principle I now call concentration of power.
Most people have no idea of the giant capacity we can immediately command when we focus all of our
resources on mastering a single area of our lives. Controlled focus is like a laser beam that can cut
through anything that seems to be stopping you. When we focus consistently on improvement in
any area, we develop unique distinctions on how to make that area better. One reason so few
of us achieve what we truly want is that we never direct our focus; we never concentrate our power.
Most people dabble their way through life, never deciding to master anything in particular. In fact, I
believe most people fail in life simply because they major in minor things. I believe that one of life's
major lessons is learning to understand what makes us do what we do. What shapes human behavior?
The answers to this question provide critical keys to shaping your own destiny.
My entire life has been continually driven by a singular, compelling focus: What makes the
difference in the quality of people's lives? How is it that so often people from such humble beginnings
and devastating backgrounds manage in spite of it all to create lives that inspire us? Conversely, why
6

choke 1. transitives Verb (er)würgen, (auch intransitives Verb) ersticken; choke back Ärger unterdrücken,
Tränen zurückhalten; choke down hinunterwürgen; choke up verstopfen; 2. MOTOR Choke, Luftklappe
7
virtually praktisch, so gut wie
do many of those born into privileged environments, with every resource for success at their fingertips,
end up fat, frustrated, and often chemically addicted? What makes some people's lives an example and
others' a warning? What is the secret that creates passionate, happy, and grateful lives in many, while
for others the refrain might be, "Is that all there is?"
My own magnificent obsession began with some simple questions: "How can I take immediate
control of my life? What can I do today that can make a difference—that could help me and others to
shape our destinies? How can I expand, learn, grow, and share that knowledge with others in a
meaningful and enjoyable way?"
At a very early age, I developed a belief that we're all here to contribute something unique, that
deep within each of us lies a special gift. You see, I truly believe we all have a sleeping giant within us.
Each of us has a talent, a gift, our own bit of genius just waiting to be tapped. It might be a talent for
art or music. It might be a special way of relating to the ones you love. It might be a genius for selling
or innovating or reaching out in your business or your career. I choose to believe that our Creator
doesn't play favorites, that we've all been created unique, but with equal opportunities for
experiencing life to the fullest. I decided many years ago that the most important way I could spend
my life would be to invest it in something that would outlast it. I decided that somehow I must
contribute in some way that would live on long after I was gone.
Today, I have the incredible privilege of sharing my ideas and feelings with literally millions of
people through my books, tapes, and television shows. I've personally worked with over a quarter of a
million people in the last few years alone. I've assisted members of Congress, CEOs, presidents of
companies and countries, managers and mothers, salespeople, accountants, lawyers, doctors,
psychiatrists, counselors, and professional athletes. I've worked with phobics, the clinically depressed,
people with multiple personalities, and those who thought they had no personality. Now I have the
unique good fortune of sharing the best of what I've learned with you, and for that opportunity I am
truly grateful and excited.
Through it all, I've continued to recognize the power individuals have to change virtually
anything and everything in their lives in an instant. I've learned that the resources we need to turn our
dreams into reality are within us, merely waiting for the day when we decide to wake up and claim our
birthright. I wrote this book for one reason: to be a wake-up call that will challenge those who are
committed to living and being more to tap their God-given power. There are ideas and strategies in
this book to help you produce specific, measurable, long-lasting changes in yourself and others.
You see, I believe I know who you really are. I believe you and I must be kindred souls. Your
desire to expand has brought you to this book. It is the invisible hand that guided you. I know that no
matter where you are in your life, you want more! No matter how well you're already doing or how
challenged you now may be, deep inside of you there lies a belief that your experience of life can and
will be much greater than it already is. You are destined for your own unique form of greatness,
whether it is as an outstanding professional, teacher, businessperson, mother, or father. Most
importantly, you not only believe this, but you've taken action. You not only bought this book, but
you're also doing something right now that unfortunately is unique—you're reading it! Statistics show
that less than 10 percent of people who buy a book read past the first chapter. What an unbelievable
waste! This is a giant book that you can use to produce giant results in your life. Clearly, you're the
kind of person who won't cheat yourself by dabbling. By consistently taking advantage of each of the
chapters in this book, you'll ensure your ability to maximize your potential.
I challenge you not only to do whatever it takes to read this book in its entirety (unlike the
masses who quit) but also to use what you learn in simple ways each day. This is the all-important
step that's necessary for you to produce the results you're committed to.

HOW TO CREATE LASTING CHANGE
For changes to be of any true value, they've got to be lasting and consistent. We've all experienced
change for a moment, only to feel let down and disappointed in the end. In fact, many people attempt
change with a sense of fear and dread because unconsciously they believe the changes will only be
temporary. A prime example of this is someone who needs to begin dieting, but finds himself putting it
off, primarily because he unconsciously knows that whatever pain he endures in order to create
the change will bring him only a short-term reward. For most of my life I've pursued what I consider to
be the organizing principles of lasting change, and you'll learn many of these and how to utilize them
in the pages that follow. But for now, I'd like to share with you three elementary principles of change
that you and I can use immediately to change our lives. While these principles are simple, they are
also extremely powerful when they are skillfully applied. These are the exact same changes that an
individual must make in order to create personal change, that a company must make in order to
maximize its potential, and that a country must make in order to carve out its place in the world. In
fact, as a world community these are the changes that we all must make to preserve the
quality of life around the globe.
STEP ONE

Raise Your Standards
Any time you sincerely want to make a change, the first thing you must do is to raise your
standards. When people ask me what really changed my life eight years ago, I tell them that
absolutely the most important thing was changing what I demanded of myself. I wrote down all the
things I would no longer accept in my life, all the things I would no longer tolerate, and all the things
that I aspired to becoming.
Think of the far-reaching consequences set in motion by men and women who raised their
standards and acted in accordance with them, deciding they would tolerate no less. History chronicles
the inspiring examples of people like Leonardo da Vinci, Abraham Lincoln, Helen Keller, Mahatma
Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr., Rosa Parks, Albeit Einstein, Cesar Chavez, Soichiro Honda, and many
others who took the magnificently powerful step of raising their standards. The same power that was
available to them is available to you, if you have the courage to claim it. Changing an organization, a
company, a country—or a world—begins with the simple step of changing yourself.
STEP TWO

Change Your Limiting Beliefs
If you raise your standards but don't really believe you can meet them, you've already sabotaged
yourself. You won't even try; you'll be lacking that sense of certainty that allows you to tap the
deepest capacity that's within you even as you read this. Our beliefs are like unquestioned commands,
telling us how things are, what's possible and what's impossible, what we can and can not do. They
shape every action, every thought, and every feeling that we experience. As a result, changing our
belief systems is central to making any real and lasting change in our lives. We must develop a sense
of certainty that we can and will meet the new standards before we actually do.
Without taking control of your belief systems, you can raise your standards as much as you like,
but you'll never have the conviction to back them up. How much do you think Gandhi would have
accomplished had he not believed with every fiber of his being in the power of nonviolent opposition?
It was the congruence of his beliefs which gave him access to his inner resources and enabled him to
meet challenges which would have swayed a less committed man. Empowering beliefs—this sense of
certainty—is the force behind any great success throughout history.
STEP THREE

Change Your Strategy
In order to keep your commitment, you need the best strategies for achieving results. One of my core
beliefs is that if you set a higher standard, and you can get yourself to believe, then you certainly can
figure out the strategies. You simply will find a way. Ultimately, that's what this whole book is about. It
shows you strategies for getting the job done, and I'll tell you now that the best strategy in almost any
case is to find a role-model, someone who's already getting the results you want, and then tap into
their knowledge. Learn what they're doing, what their core beliefs are, and how they think. Not only
will this make you more effective, it will also save you a huge amount of time because you won't have
to reinvent the wheel. You can fine-tune it, reshape it, and perhaps even make it better.
This book will provide you with the information and impetus to commit to all three of these master
principles of quality change: it will help you raise your standards by discovering what they currently
are and realizing what you want them to be; it will help you change the core beliefs that are keeping
you from where you want to go and enhance those that already serve you; and it will assist you in
developing a series of strategies for more elegantly, quickly, and efficiently producing the results you
desire.
You see, in life, lots of people know what to do, but few people actually do what they know.
Knowing is not enough! You must take action. If you will allow me the opportunity, through this book
I'll be your personal coach. What do coaches do? Well, first, they care about you. They've spent years
focusing on a particular area of expertise, and they've continued to make key distinctions about how to
produce results more quickly. By utilizing the strategies your coach shares with you, you can
immediately and dramatically change your performance. Sometimes, your coach doesn't even tell you something new, but reminds you of what you already know, and then gets you to do it. This is the
role, with your permission, that I'll be playing for you.
On what, specifically, will I be coaching you? I'll offer you distinctions of power in how to create
lasting improvements in the quality of your life. Together, we will concentrate on (not dabble in!) the
mastery of the five areas of life that I believe impact us most. They are:

1. Emotional Mastery
Mastering this lesson alone will take you most of the way toward mastering the other four! Think about
it. Why do you want to lose weight? Is it just to have less fat on your body? Or is it because of the way
you think you'd feel if you freed yourself of those unwanted pounds, giving yourself more energy and
vitality, making yourself feel more attractive to others, and boosting your confidence and self-esteem
to the stratosphere? Virtually everything we do is to change the way we feel—yet most of
us have little or no training in how to do this quickly and effectively. It's amazing how often we use the
intelligence at our command to work ourselves into unresourceful emotional states, forgetting about
the multitude of innate talents each of us already possesses. Too many of us leave ourselves at the
mercy of outside events over which we may have no control, failing to take charge of our emotions—
over which we have all the control—and relying instead on short-term quick fixes. How else can we
explain the fact that, while less than 5 percent of the world's population lives in the United States, we
consume more than 50 percent of the world's cocaine? Or that our national defense budget, which
currently runs in the billions, is equaled by what we spend on alcohol consumption? Or that 15 million
Americans are diagnosed every year as clinically depressed, and more than $500 million worth of
prescriptions are written for the antidepressant drug Prozac?
In this book, you will discover what makes you do what you do, and the triggers for the
emotions you experience most often. You will then be given a step-by-step plan to show you how to
identify which emotions are empowering, which are disempowering, and how to use both kinds to your
best advantage so that your emotions become not a hindrance, but instead a powerful tool in helping
you achieve your highest potential.

2. Physical Mastery
Is it worth it to have everything you've ever dreamed of, yet not have the physical health to be able to
enjoy it? Do you wake up every morning feeling energized, powerful, and ready to take on a new day?
Or do you wake up feeling as tired as the night before, riddled with aches, and resentful at having to
start all over again? Will your current lifestyle make you a statistic? One of every two Americans dies
of coronary disease; one of three dies of cancer. To borrow a phrase from the seventeenth-century
physician Thomas Moffett, we are "digging our graves with our teeth" as we cram our bodies with
high-fat, nutritionally empty foods, poison our systems with cigarettes, alcohol, and drugs, and sit
passively in front of our TV sets. This second master lesson will help you take control of your physical
health so that you not only look good, but you feel good and know that you're in control of your life, in
a body that radiates vitality and allows you to accomplish your outcomes.
3. Relationship Mastery
Other than mastering your own emotions and physical health, there is nothing I can think of that is
more important than learning to master your relationships—romantic, family, business, and social.
After all, who wants to learn, grow, and become successful and happy all by themselves? The third
master lesson in this book will reveal the secrets to enable you to create quality relationships—first
with yourself, then with others. You will begin by discovering what you value most highly, what
your expectations are, the rules by which you play the game of life, and how it all relates to the other
players. Then, as you achieve mastery of this all-important skill, you will learn how to connect with
people at the deepest level and be rewarded with something we all want to experience: a sense of
contribution, of knowing that we have made a difference in other people's lives. I've found that, for me,
the greatest resource is a relationship because it opens the doors to every resource I need. Mastery
of this lesson will give you unlimited resources for growing and contributing.

4. Financial Mastery
By the time they reach the age of sixty-five, most Americans are either dead broke—or dead! That's
hardly what most people envision for themselves as they look ahead to the golden age of retirement.
Yet without the conviction that you deserve financial well-being, backed up by a workable game plan,
how can you turn your treasured scenario into reality? The fourth master lesson in this book will teach
you how to go beyond the goal of mere survival in your autumn years of life, and even now, for
that matter. Because we have the good fortune to live in a capitalist society, each of us has the
capability to carry out our dreams. Yet most of us experience financial pressure on an ongoing basis,
and we fantasize that having more money would relieve that pressure. This is a grand cultural
delusion—let me assure you that the more money you have, the more pressure you're likely to feel.
The key is not the mere pursuit of wealth, but changing your beliefs and attitudes about it so you see
it as a means for contribution, not the end-all and be-all for happiness.
To forge a financial destiny of abundance, you will first learn how to change what causes scarcity
in your life, and then how to experience on a consistent basis the values, beliefs, and emotions that
are essential to experiencing wealth and holding on to it and expanding it. Then you'll define your
goals and shape your dreams with an eye toward achieving the highest possible level of well-being,
filling you with peace of mind and freeing you to look forward with excitement to all the possibilities
that life has to offer.

5. Time Mastery
Masterpieces take time. Yet how many of us really know how to use it? I'm not talking about time
management; I'm talking about actually taking time and distorting it, manipulating it so that it
becomes your ally rather than your enemy. The fifth master lesson in this book will teach you, first,
how short-term evaluations can lead to long-term pain. You will learn how to make a real decision and
how to manage your desire for instantaneous gratification, thus allowing your ideas, your creations—
even your own potential—the time to reach full fruition. Next you'll learn how to design the necessary
maps and strategies for following up on your decision, making it a reality with the willingness to take
massive action, the patience to experience "lag time," and the flexibility to change your approach as
often as needed. Once you have mastered time, you will understand how true it is that most people
overestimate what they can accomplish in a year—and underestimate what they can achieve in a
decade!
I'm not sharing these lessons with you to say that I have all the answers or that my life has been
perfect or smooth. I've certainly had my share of challenging times. But through it all, I've managed to
learn, persist, and continually succeed throughout the years. Each time I've met a challenge,
I've used what I've learned to take my life to a new level. And, like yours, my level of mastery in these
five areas continues to expand.
Also, living my lifestyle may not be the answer for you. My dreams and goals may not be yours.
I believe, though, that the lessons I've learned about how to turn dreams into reality, how to take the
intangible and make it real, are fundamental to achieving any level of personal or professional success.
I wrote this book to be an action guide—a textbook for increasing the quality of your life and
the amount of enjoyment that you can pull from it. While I'm obviously extremely proud of my
first book. Unlimited Power, and the impact it's had on people all over the world, I feel this book will
bring you some new and unique distinctions of power that can help you move your life to the next level.
We'll be reviewing some of the fundamentals, since repetition is the mother of skill. Therefore, I
hope this will be a book you'll read again and again, a book you'll come back to and utilize as a tool to
trigger yourself to find the answers that already lie inside you. Even so, remember that as you read
this book, you don't have to believe or use everything within it. Grab hold of the things you think are
useful; put them in action immediately. You won't have to implement all of the strategies or use all of
the tools in this book to make some major changes. All have life-changing potential individually; used
together, however, they will produce explosive results.
This book is filled with the strategies for achieving the success you desire, with organizing
principles that I have modeled from some of the most powerful and interesting people in our culture.
I've had the unique opportunity to meet, interview, and model a huge variety of people—people with
impact and unique character—from Norman Cousins to Michael Jackson, from coach John Wooden to
financial wizard John Templeton, from the captains of industry to cab drivers. In the following pages,
you'll find not only the benefits of my own experience, but that of the thousands of books, tapes,
seminars, and interviews that I've accumulated over the last ten years of my life, as I continue the
exciting, ongoing quest of learning and growing a little bit more, every single day.
The purpose of this book is not just to help you make a singular change in your life, but rather
to be a pivot point that can assist you in taking your entire life to a new level. The focus of this book
is on creating global changes. What do I mean by this? Well, you can learn to make changes in your
life—overcome a fear or a phobia, increase the quality of a relationship, or overcome your pattern of
procrastinating. All these are incredibly valuable skills, and if you've read Unlimited Power, you've
already learned many of them. However, as you continue through the following pages, you'll find that
there are key leverage points within your life that, if you make one small change, will literally
transform every aspect of your life.
This book is designed to offer you the strategies that can help you to create, live, and enjoy the
life you currently may only be dreaming of. In this book you will learn a series of simple and specific
strategies for addressing the cause of any challenge and changing it with the least amount of
effort. For example, it might be hard for you to believe that merely by changing one word that is part
of your habitual vocabulary, you could immediately change your emotional patterns for life. Or that by
changing the consistent questions that you consciously or unconsciously ask yourself, you could
instantly change what you focus on and therefore what actions you take every day of your life. Or that
by making one belief change, you could powerfully change your level of happiness. Yet in the following
chapters you'll learn to master these techniques—and many more—to effect the changes you desire.
And so it's with great respect that I begin this relationship with you as together we begin a
journey of discovery and the actualization of our deepest and truest potentials. Life is a gift, and it
offers us the privilege, opportunity, and responsibility to give something back by becoming more.
So let's begin our journey by exploring ..
2
DECISIONS: THE PATHWAY TO POWER
Man is born to live and not to prepare to live.
BORIS PASTERNAK
Do you remember when Jimmy Carter was still the President of the United States, the Empire was
striking back, Yoda and Pac Man were the rage, and nothing came between Brooke Shields and her
Calvins? The Ayatollah Khomeini had come to power in Iran and held our fellow Americans hostage. In
Poland, an electrician from the Gdansk shipyards named Lech Walesa did the unthinkable: he decided
to take a stand against the Communist hold. He led his co-workers in a strike, and when they tried to
lock him out of his place of work, he simply climbed over the wall. A lot of walls have come down since
then, haven't they?
Do you remember hearing the news that John Lennon was murdered? Do you remember when
Mount Saint Helens erupted, leveling 150 square miles? Did you cheer when the underdog U.S. hockey
team beat the Soviets, and went on to win the Olympic gold medal? That was 1980, a little more than
ten years ago.
Think for a moment. Where were you then? What were you like? Who were your friends? What
were your hopes and dreams? If someone had asked you, "Where will you be in ten or fifteen years?"
what would you have told them? Are you today where you wanted to be back then? A decade can pass
quickly, can't it?
More importantly, maybe we should be asking ourselves, "How am I going to live the next
ten years of my life? How am I going to live today in order to create the tomorrow I'm
committed to? What am I going to stand for from now on? What's important to me right now,
and what will be important to me in the long term? What actions can I take today that will shape my
ultimate destiny?"
You see, ten years from now, you will surely arrive. The question is: Where? Who will you have
become? How will you live? What will you contribute? Now is the time to design the next ten years of
your life—not once they're over. We must seize the moment. We're already immersed in the early pan
of a new decade, and we're entering the final years of the twentieth century/ And shortly we'll be in
the twenty-first century, a new millennium. The year 2000 will be here before you know it, and in a
mere ten years, you'll be looking back on this day and remembering it like you do 1980. Will you be
pleased when you look back on the nineties, or perturbed? Delighted, or disturbed?
In the beginning of 1980,1 was a nineteen-year-old kid. I felt alone and frustrated. I had
virtually no financial resources. There were no success coaches available to me, no successful friends
or mentors, no clear-cut goals. I was floundering and fat. Yet within a few short years I discovered a
power that I used to transform virtually every area of my life. And once I'd mastered it, I used it to
revolutionize my life in less than a year. It was the tool I used to dramatically increase my level of
confidence and therefore my ability to take action and produce measurable results. I also used it to
take back control of my physical well-being and permanently rid myself of thirty-eight pounds of fat.
Through it, I attracted the woman of my dreams, married her, and created the family I desired. I used
this power to change my income from subsistence level to over $1 million a year. It moved me from
my tiny apartment (where I was washing my dishes in the bathtub because there was no kitchen) to
my family's current home, the Del Mar Castle. This one distinction took me from feeling completely
alone and insignificant to feeling grateful for new opportunities to contribute something to millions of
people around the world. And it's a power I continue to use every single day of my life to shape my
personal destiny.
In Unlimited Power, I made it abundantly clear that the most powerful way to shape our lives is
to get ourselves to take action. The difference in the results that people produce comes down to what
they've done differently from others in the same situations. Different actions produce different
results. Why? Because any action is a cause set in motion, and its effect builds on past effects to
move us in a definite direction. Every direction leads to an ultimate destination: our destiny.
In essence, if we want to direct our lives, we must take control of our consistent actions. It's not
what we do once in a while that shapes our lives, but what we do consistently. The key and most
important question, then, is this: What precedes all of our actions? What determines what actions we
take, and therefore, who we become, and what our ultimate destination is in life? What is the father of
action?
The answer, of course, is what I've been alluding to all along: the power of decision.
Everything that happens in your life—both what you're thrilled with and what you're challenged by—
began with a decision. I believe that it's in your moments of decision that your destiny is
shaped. The decisions that you're making right now, every day, will shape how you feel today as well
as who you're going to become in the nineties and beyond.
As you look back over the last ten years, were there times when a different decision would have
made your life radically different from today, either for better or for worse? Maybe, for example, you
made a career decision that changed your life. Or maybe you failed to make one. Maybe you decided
during the last ten years to get married—or divorced. You might have purchased a tape, a book, or
attended a seminar and, as a result, changed your beliefs and actions. Maybe you decided to have
children, or to put it off in pursuit of a career. Perhaps you decided to invest in a home or a business.
Maybe you decided to start exercising, or to give it up. It could be that you decided to stop smoking.
Maybe you decided to move to another part of the country, or to take a trip around the world. How
have these decisions brought you to this point in your life?
Did you experience emotions of tragedy and frustration, injustice or hopelessness during the last
decade of your life? I know I certainly did. If so, what did you decide to do about them? Did you push
beyond your limits, or did you just give up? How have these decisions shaped your current life path?

Man is not the creature of circumstances; circumstances are the creatures
of men.
BENJAMIN DISRAELI
More than anything else, I believe it's our decisions, not the conditions of our lives, that
determine our destiny. You and I both know that there are people who were born with advantages:
they've had genetic advantages, environmental advantages, family advantages, or relationship
advantages.
Yet you and I also know that we constantly meet, read, and hear about people who against all
odds have exploded beyond the limitations of their conditions by making new decisions about what to
do with their lives. They've become examples of the unlimited power of the human spirit.
If we decide to, you and I can make our lives one of these inspiring examples. How?
Simply by making decisions today about how we're going to live in the nineties and beyond. If you
don't make decisions about how you're going to live, then you've already made a decision, haven't you?
You're making a decision to be directed by the environment instead of shaping your own destiny. My
whole life changed in just one day—the day I determined not just what I'd like to have in my life or
what I wanted to become, but when I decided who and what I was committed to having and being in
my life. That's a simple distinction, but a critical one.
Think for a moment. Is there a difference between being interested in something, and being
committed to it? You bet there is! Many times people say things like, "Gosh, I really would like to make
more money," or "I'd like to be closer to my kids," or "You know, I'd really like to make a difference in
the world." But that kind of statement is not a commitment at all. It's merely stating a preference,
saying, "I'm interested in having this happen, if I don't have to do anything." That's not power! It's a
weak prayer made without even the faith to launch it.
Not only do you have to decide what results you are committed to, but also the kind of person
that you're committed to becoming. As we discussed in Chapter 1, you have to set standards for what
you consider to be acceptable behavior for yourself, and decide what you should expect from those
you care about. If you don't set a baseline standard for what you'll accept in your life, you'll
find it's easy to slip into behaviors and attitudes or a quality of life that's far below what you
deserve. You need to set and live by these standards no matter what happens in your life. Even if it
all goes wrong, even if it rains on your parade, even if the stock market crashes, even if your lover
leaves you even if no one gives you the support that you need, you still must stay committed to your
decision that you will live your life at the highest level.
Unfortunately, most people never do this because they're too busy making excuses. The reason
they haven't achieved their goals or are not living the lives they desire is because of the way their
parents treated them, or because of the lack of opportunities that they experienced in their youth, or
because of the education they missed, or because they're too old, or because they're too young. All of
these excuses are nothing but B.S. (Belief Systems)! And they're not only limiting, they're destructive.
Using the power of decision gives you the capacity to get past any excuse to change any and
every pan of your life in an instant. It can change your relationships, your working environment, your
level of physical fitness, your income, and your emotional states. It can determine whether you're
happy or sad, whether you're frustrated or excited, enslaved by circumstances, or expressing your
freedom. It's the source of change within an individual, a family, a community, a society, our world.
What's changed everything in Eastern Europe in the last few years? The people there—people like you
and me—have made new decisions about what they'll stand for, what's acceptable and unacceptable to
them and what they'll no longer tolerate. Certainly Gorbatchows decisions helped pave the way, but
Lech Walesa's determination and commitment to a higher standard built the road to massive economic
and political change.
I often ask people who complain about their jobs, "Why did you go to work today?" Their answer
usually is, "Because I had to." You and I need to remember one thing: there is virtually nothing that
we have to do in this country. You certainly don't have to go to work. Not here! And you certainly don't
have to work at a particular location on a particular day. Not in America! You don't have to do what
you've done for the last ten years. You can decide to do something else, something new, today. Right
now you can make a decision: to go back to school, to master dancing or singing, to take control of
your finances, to learn to fly a helicopter, to turn your body into an inspiration, to begin meditating, to
enroll' in ballroom dancing, to attend a NASA space camp, to learn to speak French, to read more to
your children, to spend more time in the flower garden, even to fly to Fiji and live on an island. If you
truly decide to you can do almost anything. So if you don't like the current relationship you're in,
make the decision now to change it. If you don't like your current job, change it. If you don't like the
way you feel about yourself, change it. If it's a higher level of physical vitality and health you want,
you can change it now. In a moment you can seize the same power that has shaped history.
I've written this book to challenge you to awaken the giant power of decision and to claim
the birthright of unlimited power, radiant vitality, and joyous passion that is yours! You must
know that you can make a new decision right now that will immediately change your life—a decision
about a habit you'll change or a skill that you'll master, or how you'll treat people, or a call that you'll
now make to someone you haven't spoken to in years. Maybe there's someone you should contact to
take your career to the next level. Maybe you could make a decision right now to enjoy and
cultivate the most positive emotions that you deserve to experience daily. Is it possible you might
choose more joy or more fun or more confidence or more peace of mind? Even before you turn the
page, you can make use of the power that already resides within you. Make the decision now that can
send you in a new, positive, and powerful direction for growth and happiness.

Nothing can resist the human will that will stake even its existence on its
stated purpose.
BENJAMIN DISRAELI
Your life changes the moment you make a new, congruent, and committed decision. Who
would have thought that the determination and conviction of a quiet, unassuming man—a lawyer by
trade and a pacifist by principle—would have the power to topple a vast empire? Yet Ma-hatma
Gandhi's indomitable decision to rid India of British rule was a virtual powder keg that set in motion a
chain of events that would forever change the balance of world power. People didn't see how he could
accomplish his aims, but he'd left himself no other choice than to act according to his conscience. He
simply wouldn't accept any other possibility.
Decision was the source of John F. Kennedy's power as he faced off Nikita Khrushchev during the
tense Cuban Missile Crisis and averted World War III. Decision was the source of Martin Luther King,
Jr.'s power as he gave voice so eloquently to the frustrations and aspirations of a people who would no
longer be denied, and forced the world to take notice. Decision was the source of Donald Trump's
meteoric rise to the top of the financial world, and also the source of his devastating downfall. It's the
power that allowed Pete Rose to maximize his physical abilities to Hall of Fame potential—and then
ultimately to destroy his life's dream. Decisions act as the source of both problems and incredible joys
and opportunities. This is the power that sparks the process of turning the invisible into the visible.
True decisions are the catalyst for turning our dreams into reality.
The most exciting thing about this force, this power, is that you already possess it. The
explosive impetus of decision is not something reserved for a select few with the right credentials or
money or family background. It's available to the common laborer as well as the king. It's available to
you now as you hold this book in your hands. In the very next moment you can use this mighty force
that lies waiting within you if you merely muster the courage to claim it. Will today be the day you
finally decide that who you are as a person is much more than you've been demonstrating? Will today
be the day you decide once and for all to make your life consistent with the quality of your spirit? Then
start by proclaiming, "This is who I am. This is what my life is about. And this is what I'm going to do.
Nothing will stop me from achieving my destiny. I will not be denied!"
Consider a fiercely proud individual, a woman named Rosa Parks, who one day in 1955 stepped
onto a bus in Montgomery, Alabama, and refused to give up her seat to a white person as she was
legally required to do. Her one quiet act of civil disobedience sparked a firestorm of controversy and
became a symbol for generations to follow. It was the beginning of the civil rights movement, a
consciousness-awakening ground swell that we are grappling with even today as we redefine the
meaning of equality, opportunity, and justice for all Americans regardless of race, creed, or sex. Was
Rosa Parks thinking of the future when she refused to give up her seat in that bus? Did she have a
divine plan for how she could change the structure of a society? Perhaps. But what is more likely is
that her decision to hold herself to a higher standard compelled her to act. What a far-reaching effect
one woman's decision has had!
If you're thinking, "I'd love to make decisions like that, but I've experienced real tragedies," let
me offer you the example of Ed Roberts. He is an "ordinary" man confined to a wheelchair who
became extraordinary by his decision to act beyond his apparent limitations. Ed has been paralyzed
from the neck down since he was fourteen years old. He uses a breathing device that he's mastered
against great odds to lead a "normal" life by day, and he spends every night in an iron lung. Having
fought a battle against polio, several times almost losing his life, he certainly could have decided to
focus on his own pain, but instead chose to make a difference for others.
Just what has he managed to do? For the last fifteen years, his decision to fight against a world
he often found condescending has resulted in many enhancements to the quality of life for the disabled.
Facing a multitude of myths about the capabilities of the physically challenged, Ed educated the public
and initiated everything from wheelchair access ramps and special parking spaces to grab bars. He
became the first quadriplegic to graduate from the University of California, Berkeley, and he eventually
held the position of director of the California State Department of Rehabilitation, again pioneering this
position for the disabled.
Ed Roberts is powerful evidence that it's not where you start out but the decisions you make
about where you're determined to end up that matter. All of his actions were founded in a single,
powerful, committed moment of decision. What could you do with your life if you really decided to?
Many people say, "Well, I'd love to make a decision like that, but I'm not sure how I could
change my life." They're paralyzed by the fear that they don't know exactly how to turn their dreams
into reality. And as a result, they never make the decisions that could make their lives into the
masterpieces they deserve to be. I'm here to tell you that it's not important initially to know how
you're going to create a result. What's important is to decide you will find a way, no matter what. In
Unlimited Power, I outlined what I call "The Ultimate Success Formula," which is an elementary
process for getting you where you want to go: 1) Decide what you want, 2) Take action, 3) Notice
what's working or not, and 4) Change your approach until you achieve what you want. Deciding to
produce a result causes events to be set in motion. If you simply decide what it is you want, get
yourself to take action, learn from it, and change your approach, then you will create the momentum
to achieve the result. As soon as you truly commit to making something happen, the "how" will reveal
itself.

Concerning all acts of initiative and creation, there is one elementary
truth—that the moment one definitely commits oneself, then Providence
moves, too.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
If making decisions is so simple and powerful, then why don't more people follow Nike's advice
and "Just Do It"? I think one of the simplest reasons is that most of us don't recognize what it even
means to make a real decision. We don't realize the force of change that a congruent, committed
decision creates. Part of the problem is that for so long most of us have used the term "decision" so
loosely that it's come to describe something like a wish list. Instead of making decisions, we keep
stating preferences. Making a true decision, unlike saying, "I'd like to quit smoking," is cutting off any
other possibility. In fact, the word "decision" comes from the Latin roots de, which means "from," and
caedere, which means "to cut." Making a true decision means committing to achieving a result,
and then cutting yourself off from any other possibility.
When you truly decide you'll never smoke cigarettes again, that's it. It's over! You no longer
even consider the possibility of smoking. If you're one of the people who's ever exercised the power of
decision this way, you know exactly what I'm talking about. An alcoholic knows that even after years
of absolute sobriety, if he fools himself into thinking that he can take even one drink, he'll have to
begin all over again. After making a true decision, even a tough one, most of us feel a tremendous
amount of relief. We've finally gotten off the fence! And we all know how great it feels to have a clear,
unquestioned objective.
This kind of clarity gives you power. With clarity, you can produce the results that you really
want for your life. The challenge for most of us is that we haven't made a decision in so long we've
forgotten what it feels like. We've got flabby decision-making muscles! Some people even have a hard
time deciding what they're going to have for dinner.
So how do we strengthen these muscles? Give them a workout! The way to make better
decisions is to make more of them. Then make sure you learn from each one, including those that
don't seem to work out in the short term: they will provide valuable distinctions to make better
evaluations and therefore decisions in the future. Realize that decision making, like any skill you focus
on improving, gets better the more often you do it. The more often you make decisions, the more
you'll realize that you truly are in control of your life. You'll look forward to future challenges, and
you'll see them as an opportunity to make new distinctions and move your life to the next level.
I can't overemphasize the power and value of gaining even one, single distinction—a sole piece
of information—that can be used to change the course of your life. Information is power when it's
acted upon, and one of my criteria for a true decision is that action flows from it. The exciting thing is
that you never know when you're going to get it! The reason I read over 700 books, listened to tapes,
and went to so many seminars is that I understood the power of a single distinction. It might be on the
next page or in the next chapter of this book. It might even be something you already know. But for
some reason, this is the time it finally sinks in and you begin to use it. Remember that repetition is
the mother of skill. Distinctions empower us to make better decisions and, therefore, create the
results that we desire for ourselves. Not having certain distinctions can cause you major pain. For
example, many of the most famous people in our culture have achieved their dreams but have still not
found a way to enjoy them. They often turn to drugs because they feel unfulfilled. This is because they
are missing the distinction between achieving one's goals and living one's values, something you will
learn to master in the pages to follow. Another distinction that many people don't have causes pain in
their relationships on a regular basis. It's a rules distinction, another key element we'll be examining in
our journey of self-discovery. Sometimes, not having a certain distinction can cost you everything.
People who run strenuously8 yet continue to eat fatty foods, clogging up their arteries, court heart
attacks.
For most of my life, I've pursued what the famed business expert Dr. W. Edwards Deming calls
profound knowledge. To me, profound knowledge is any simple distinction, strategy, belief, skill, or
tool that, the minute we understand it, we can apply it to make immediate increases in the quality of
our lives. This book and my life have been committed to pursuing profound knowledge that has
universal application to improving our personal and professional lives. I'm constantly figuring out how
to communicate this knowledge with people in ways that truly empower them to improve their mental,
emotional, physical, and financial destinies.
It is in your moments of decision that your destiny is shaped.
—ANTHONY ROBB1NS

8

strenuous anstrengend; unermüdlich
Three decisions that you make every moment of your life control your destiny. These three decisions
determine what you'll notice, how you'll feel, what you'll do, and ultimately what you will contribute
and who you become. If you don't control these three decisions, you simply aren't in control of your
life. When you do control them, you begin to sculpt your experience.
The three decisions that control your destiny are:
1. Your decisions about what to focus on.
2. Your decisions about what things mean to you.
3. Your decisions about what to do to create the results you desire.
You see, it's not what's happening to you now or what has happened in your past that determines who
you become. Rather, it's your decisions about what to focus on, what things mean to you, and
what you're going to do about them that will determine your ultimate destiny. Know that if
anyone is enjoying greater success than you in any area, they're making these three decisions
differently from you in some context or situation. Clearly, Ed Roberts chose to focus on something
different than most people in his position would. He focused on how he could make a difference. His
physical difficulties meant "challenge" to him. What he decided to do, clearly, was anything that could
make the quality of life for others in his position more comfortable. He absolutely committed himself to
shaping the environment in a way that would improve the quality of life for all physically challenged
people.
"I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by a
conscious endeavor."
—HENRY DAVID THOREAU
Too many of us don't make the majority of our decisions consciously, especially these three absolutely
crucial ones; in so doing, we pay a major price. In fact, most people live what I call "The Niagara
Syndrome." I believe that life is like a river, and that most people jump on the river of life without
ever really deciding where they want to end up. So, in a short period of time, they get caught up in the
current: current events, current fears, current challenges. When they come to forks in the river, they
don't consciously decide where they want to go, or which is the right direction or them. They merely
"go with the flow." They become a part of the mass of people who are directed by the environment
instead of by their own values. As a result, they feel out of control. They remain in this unconscious
state until one day the sound of the raging water awakens them, and they discover that they're five
feet from Niagara Falls in a boat with no oars. At this point, they say, "Oh, shoot!" But by then it's too
late. They're going to take a fall. Sometimes it's an emotional fall. Sometimes it's a physical fall.
Sometimes it's a financial fall. It's likely that whatever challenges you have in your life
currently could have been avoided by some better decisions upstream.
How do we turn things around if we're caught up in the momentum of the raging river? Either
make a decision to put both oars in the water and start paddling like crazy in a new direction, or
decide to plan ahead. Set a course for where you really want to go, and have a plan or map so that
you can make quality decisions along the way.
Although you may never have even thought about it, your brain has already constructed an
internal system for making decisions. This system acts like an invisible force, directing all of your
thoughts, actions, and feelings, both good and bad, every moment that you live. It controls how you
evaluate everything in your life, and it's largely driven by your subconscious mind. The scary thing is
that most people never consciously set this system up. Instead, it's been installed through the years
by sources as diverse as parents, peers, teachers, television, advertisers, and the culture at large. This
system is comprised of five components: 1) your core beliefs and unconscious rules, 2) your life
values, 3) your references, 4) the habitual questions that you ask yourself, and 5) the emotional
states you experience in each moment. The synergistic relationship of these five elements exerts a
force that's responsible for prompting you to or stopping you from taking action, causing you to
anticipate or worry about the future, making you feel loved or rejected, and dictating your level of
success and happiness. It determines why you do what you do and why you don't do some things that
you know you need to do.
By changing any one of these five elements—whether it's a core belief or rule, a value, a
reference, a question, or an emotional state—you can immediately produce a powerful and measurable
change in your life. Most importantly, you'll be fighting the cause instead of the effects. Remember, if
you're overeating on a regular basis, the real cause is usually a values problem or a beliefs problem
rather than a problem with food itself. Throughout this book, step-by-step, I'll be guiding you in
discovering how your master system of decision making is set up, and you'll be making simple
changes to make it consistent with your desires—rather than continue to be controlled by your past
conditioning. You're about to embark on a fascinating journey of discovering who you are and what
truly makes you do what you do. With these distinctions of power, you'll be able to understand the
system of decision making that your business associates, spouse, and other loved ones are using.
You'll finally be able to understand their "fascinating" behaviors, too!
The good news is that we can override this system by making conscious decisions at any
moment in our lives. We don't have to allow the programming of our past to control our
present and future. With this book, you can reinvent yourself by systematically organizing your
beliefs and values in a way that pulls you in the direction of your life's design.
"I am not discouraged, because every wrong attempt discarded is another step forward."
—THOMAS EDISON
There is one final impediment to really utilizing the power of decision. That is that we must overcome
our fears of making the wrong decisions. Without a doubt, you will make wrong decisions in your life.
You're going to screw up! I know I certainly haven't made all the right decisions along the way. Far
from it. But I didn't expect to. Nor will I always make the right decisions in the future. I have
determined that no matter what decisions I make, I'll be flexible, look at the consequences, learn from
them, and use those lessons to make better decisions in the future. Remember: Success truly is the
result of good judgment. Good judgment is the result of experience, and experience is often
the result of bad judgment! Those seemingly bad or painful experiences are some times the most
important. When people succeed, they tend to party; when they fail, they tend to ponder, and they
begin to make new distinctions that will enhance the quality of their lives. We must commit to learning
from our mistakes, rather than beating ourselves up, or we're destined to make the same mistakes
again in the future.
As important as personal experience is, think how invaluable it is to have a role model as well—
someone who's navigated the rapids before you and has a good map for you to follow. You can have a
role model for your finances, a model for your relationships, a model for your health, a model for your
profession, or a model for any aspect of your life you're learning to master. They can save you years of
pain and keep you from going over the falls.
There will be times when you're on the river solo and you'll have to make some important
decisions on your own. The good news is that if you're willing to learn from your experience, then even
times you might think were difficult become great because they provide valuable information —key
distinctions— that you will use to make better decisions in the future. In fact, any extremely
successful person you meet will tell you—if they're honest with you—that the reason they're more
successful is that they've made more poor decisions than you have. People in my seminars often ask
me, "How long do you think it will take for me to really master this particular skill?" And my immediate
response is, "How long do you want it to take?" If you take action ten times a day (and have the
proportionate "learning experiences") while other people act on a new skill once a month, you'll have
ten months of experience in a day, you will soon master the skill, and will, ironically, probably be
considered "talented and lucky."
I became an excellent public speaker because, rather than once a week, I booked myself to
speak three times a day to anyone who would listen. While others in my organization had forty-eight
speaking engagements a year, I would have a similar number within two weeks. Within a month, I'd
have two years of experience. And within a year, I'd have a decade's worth of growth. My associates
talked about how "lucky" I was to have been born with such an "innate" talent. I tried to tell them
what I'm telling you now: mastery takes as long as you want it to take. By the way, were all of my
speeches great? Far from it! But I did make sure that I learned from every experience and that I
somehow improved until very soon I could enter a room of any size and be able to reach people from
virtually all walks of life.
No matter how prepared you are, there's one thing that I can absolutely guarantee: if you're on
the river of life, it's likely you're going to hit a few rocks. That's not being negative; that's being
accurate. The key is that when you do run aground, instead of beating yourself up for being such a
"failure," remember that there are no failures in life. There are only results. If you didn't get the
results you wanted, learn from this experience so that you have references about how to make better
decisions in the future.
"We will either find a way, or make one."
HANNIBAL
One of the most important decisions you can make to ensure your long-term happiness is to decide to
use whatever life gives you in the moment. The truth of the matter is that there's nothing you
can't accomplish if: 1) You clearly decide what it is that you're absolutely committed to achieving, 2)
You are willing to take massive action, 3) You notice what's working or not, and 4) You continue to
change your approach until you achieve what you want, using whatever life gives you along the way.
Anyone who's succeeded on a large scale has taken these four steps and followed the Ultimate Success
Formula. One of my favorite "Ultimate Success Stories" is Mr. Soichiro Honda, founder of the
corporation that bears his name. Like all companies, no matter how large, Honda Corporation began
with a decision and a passionate desire to produce a result.
In 1938, while he was still in school, Mr. Honda took everything he owned and invested it in a
little workshop where he began to develop his concept of a piston ring. He wanted to sell his work to
Toyota Corporation, so he labored day and night, up to his elbows in grease, sleeping in the machine
shop, always believing he could produce the result. He even pawned his wife's jewelry to stay in
business. But when he finally completed the piston rings and presented them to Toyota, he was told
they didn't meet Toyota's standards. He was sent back to school for two years, where he heard the
derisive laughter of his instructors and fellow students as they talked about how absurd his designs
were. But rather than focusing on the pain of the experience, he decided to continue to focus on his
goal. Finally, after two more years, Toyota gave Mr. Honda the contract he'd dreamed of. His passion
and belief paid off because he had known what he wanted, taken action, noticed what was working,
and kept changing his approach until he got what he wanted. Then a new problem arose.
The Japanese government was gearing up for war, and they refused to give him the concrete
that was necessary to build his factory. Did he quit there? No. Did he focus on how unfair this was? Did
it mean to him that his dream had died? Absolutely not. Again, he decided to utilize the experience,
and developed another strategy. He and his team invented a process for creating their own concrete
and then built their factory. During the war, it was bombed twice, destroying major portions of the
manufacturing facility. Honda's response? He immediately rallied his team, and they picked up the
extra gasoline cans that the U.S. fighters had discarded. He called them "gifts from President Truman"
because they provided him with the raw materials he needed for his manufacturing process—materials
that were unavailable at the time in Japan. Finally, after surviving all of this, an earthquake leveled his
factory. Honda decided to sell his piston operation to Toyota.
Here is a man who clearly made strong decisions to succeed. He had a passion for and belief in
what he was doing. He had a great strategy. He took massive action. He kept changing his approach,
but still he'd not produced the results that he was committed to. Yet he decided to persevere.
After the war, a tremendous gasoline shortage hit Japan, and Mr. Honda couldn't even drive his
car to get food for his family. Finally, in desperation, he attached a small motor to his bicycle. The next
thing he knew, his neighbors were asking if he could make one of his "motorized bikes" for them. One
after another, they jumped on the bandwagon until he ran out of motors. He decided to build a plant
that would manufacture motors for his new invention, but unfortunately he didn't have the capital.
As before, he made the decision to find a way no matter what! His solution was to appeal to the
18,000 bicycle shop owners in Japan by writing them each a personal letter. He told them how they
could play a role in revitalizing Japan through the mobility that his invention could provide, and
convinced 5,000 of them to advance the capital he needed. Still, his motorbike sold to only the most
hard-core bicycle fans because it was too big and bulky. So he made one final adjustment, and created
a much lighter, scaled-down version of his motorbike. He christened it "The Super Cub," and it became
an "overnight" success, earning him the Emperor's award. Later, he began to export his motorbikes to
the baby boomers of Europe and the United States, following up in the seventies with the cars that
have become so popular.
Today, the Honda Corporation employs over 100,000 people in both the United States and Japan
and is considered one of the biggest car-making empires in Japan, outselling all but Toyota in the
United States. It succeeds because one man understood the power of a truly committed decision that
is acted upon, no matter what the conditions, on a continuous basis.

THE CRYSTAL BALL CRACKED . . .
The followings are actual rejection notices received for these famous—and incredibly successful—
books.
Animal Farm, by George Orwell
"It is impossible to sell animal stories in the U.SA"
The Diary of Anne Frank, by Anne Frank
"The girl doesn't, it seems to me, have a special perception or feeling which would lift that book above
the 'curiosity' level."
Lord of the Flies, by William Golding
"It does not seem to us that you have been wholly successful in working out an admittedly promising
idea."
Lady Chatterley's Lover, by D.H. Lawrence
"For your own good do not publish this book."
Lust for Life, by living Stone
"A long, dull novel about an artist."

Honda certainly knew that sometimes when you make a decision and take action, in the short term it
may look like it's not working. In order to succeed, you must have a long-term focus. Most of the
challenges that we have in our personal lives—like indulging constantly in overeating, drinking, or
smoking, to feeling overwhelmed and giving up on our dreams—come from a short-term focus.
Success and failure are not overnight experiences. It's all the small decisions along the way that cause
people to fail. It's failure to follow up. It's failure to take action. It's failure to persist. It's failure to
manage our mental and emotional states. It's failure to control what we focus on. Conversely, success
is the result of making small decisions: deciding to hold yourself to a higher standard, deciding to
contribute, deciding to feed your mind rather than allowing the environment to control you—these
small decisions create the life experience we call success. No individual or organization that has be-
come successful has done so with short-term focus.
On a national scale, most of the challenges that we're currently experiencing are the result of
not thinking of the potential consequences of the decisions we've made. Our crises—the S&L scandal,
the challenge in our balance of trade, the budget deficit, our educational malaise, drug and alcohol
problems—all are the result of short-term thinking. This is the Niagara Syndrome at its most potent.
While you're raging along the river, focusing on the next rock you might hit, you don't—or can't—see
far enough ahead of you to avoid the falls.
As a society, we're so focused on instantaneous gratification that our short-term solutions often
become long-term problems. Our kids have trouble paying attention in school long enough to think,
memorize, and learn partly because they've become addicted to instantaneous gratification from
constant exposure to things like video games, TV commercials, and MTV. As a nation, we have the
highest number of overweight children in history because of our unrelenting pursuit of the quick fix:
fast food, instant pudding, and microwave brownies.
In business, too, this kind of short-term focus can be deadly. The whole controversy surrounding
the Exxon Valdez disaster could have been averted by making one small decision. Exxon could have
outfitted its tankers with double hulls, a proactive decision that would have prevented oil spills in the
event of collision. But the oil company chose not to, looking at the immediate rather than long-range
impact on its bottom line. Following the crash and resultant spill, Exxon is responsible for paying a
whopping $1.1 billion* as some compensation for the devastating economic damage it has caused, not
to mention the immeasurable ecological destruction to Alaska and surrounding areas.
Deciding to commit yourself to long-term results, rather than short-term fixes, is as important
as any decision you'll make in your lifetime. Failing to do this can cause not only massive financial or
societal pain, but sometimes even the ultimate personal pain.
One young man you may have heard of dropped out of high school because he decided he
wasn't going to wait any longer to follow his dream of becoming a famous musician. But this dream
didn't become reality quickly enough. In fact, by the time he was twenty-two, he feared that he had
made the wrong decision, and that no one would ever love his music. He'd been playing in piano bars,
and he was flat broke, sleeping in laundromats because he no longer had a home. The only thing that
had been holding him together was his romantic relationship. Then his girlfriend decided to leave him,
and when she did, it pushed him over the edge. He immediately focused on how he could never again
find another woman as beautiful as she. What this meant to him was that his life was over, so he
decided to commit suicide. Fortunately, before doing so, he reconsidered his options and decided
instead to check into a mental institution. Spending time there gave him some new references about
what real problems were. He later recalled saying, "Ohh, I'll never get that low again." He now
declares, "It was one of the best things I ever did because I've never gotten to feel sorry for myself,
no matter what's happened. Any problem since then is nothing compared with what I've seen other
people go through."* By renewing his commitment and following his dream long-term, he eventually
had all that he wanted. His name? Billy Joel.
Can you imagine that this man, whom millions of fans love and supermodel Christie Brinkley
married, was ever worried about the quality of his music or finding a woman as beautiful as his ex-
girlfriend? The key to remember is that what appeared to be impossible in the short term turned into a
phenomenal example of success and happiness in the long term. Billy Joel was able to pull himself out
of his depression by directing the three decisions that we all control each moment of our lives: what to
focus on, what things mean, and what to do in spite of the challenges that may appear to limit us. He
raised his standards, backed them up with new beliefs, and implemented the strategies he knew he
must.
One belief that I've developed to carry me through extremely tough times is simply this: God's
delays are not God's denials. Often, what seems impossible in the short term becomes very possible in
the long term if you persist. In order to succeed, we need to discipline ourselves to consistently think
long term. A metaphor that I use to remind myself of this is comparing life's ups and downs to the
changing of the seasons. No season lasts forever because all of life is a cycle of planting, reaping,
resting, and renewal. Winter is not infinite: even if you're having challenges today, you can never give
up on the coming of spring. For some people, winter means hibernation; for others, it means
bobsledding and downhill skiing! You can always just wait out the season, but why not make it into a
time to remember?

HARNESS THE POWER OF DECISION
In review, let me give you six quick keys to help you harness the power of decision, the power that
shapes your experience of life every moment that you live it:
1. Remember the true power of making decisions. It's a tool you can use in any moment to
change your entire life. The minute you make a new decision, you set in motion a new cause, effect,
direction, and destination for your life. You literally begin to change your life the moment you make a
new decision. Remember that when you start feeling overwhelmed, or when you feel like you don't
have a choice, or when things are happening "to" you, you can change it all if you just stop and decide
to do so. Remember, a real decision is measured by the fact that you've taken new action. If there's
no action, you haven't truly decided.
2. Realize that the hardest step in achieving anything is making a true commitment—a true
decision. Carrying out your commitment is often much easier than the decision itself, so make your
decisions intelligently, but make them quickly. Don't labor forever over the question of how or if you
can do it. Studies have shown that the most successful people make decisions rapidly because they are
clear on their values and what they really want for their lives. The same studies show that they are
slow to change their decisions, if at all. On the other hand, people who fail usually make decisions
slowly and change their minds quickly, always bouncing back and forth. Just decide! Realize that
decision making is a kind of act in itself, so a good definition for a decision might be "information acted
upon." You know you've truly made a decision when action flows from it. It becomes a cause set in
motion. Often the effect of making a decision helps create the attainment of a larger goal. A critical
rule I've made for myself is never to leave the scene of a decision without first taking a specific action
toward its realization.
3. Make decisions often. The more decisions you make, the better you're going to become at
making them. Muscles get stronger with use, and so it is with your decision-making muscles. Unleash
your power right now by making some decisions you've been putting off. You won't believe the energy
and excitement it will create in your life!
4. Learn from your decisions. There's no way around it. At times, you're going to screw up, no
matter what you do. And when the inevitable happens, instead of beating yourself into the ground,
learn something. Ask yourself, "What's good about this? What can I learn from this?" This "failure"
may be an unbelievable gift in disguise if you use it to make better decisions in the future. Rather than
focus on the short-term setback, choose instead to learn lessons that can save you time, money, or
pain, and that will give you the ability to succeed in the future.
5. Stay committed to your decisions, but stay flexible in your approach. Once you've decided
who you want to be as a person, for example, don't get stuck on the means to achieving it. It's the
end you're after. Too often, in deciding what they want for their lives, people pick the best way they
know at the time—they make a map—but then don't stay open to alternate routes. Don't become rigid
in your approach. Cultivate the art of flexibility.
6. Enjoy making decisions. You must know that in any moment a decision you make can change the
course of your life forever: the very next person you stand behind in line or sit next to on an airplane,
the very next phone call you make or receive, the very next movie you see or book you read or page
you turn could be the one single thing that causes the floodgates to open, and all of the things that
you've been waiting for to fall into place.
If you really want your life to be passionate, you need to live with this attitude of expectancy.
Years ago, I made what seemed like a small decision, and it has powerfully shaped my life. I decided
to do a seminar in Denver, Colorado. That decision caused me to meet a lady named Becky. Her last
name now is Robbins, and she is definitely one of the greatest gifts of my life. On that same trip, I
decided to write my first book, which is now published in eleven languages around the world. A few
days later, I decided to conduct a seminar in Texas, and after working for a week to fill my own
program, the promoter didn't pay me for the event—he skipped town. The obvious person to talk to
was the public relations agent he had hired, a woman who had similar woes. That woman became my
literary agent and helped to get that first book published. As a result, I have the privilege of sharing
this story with you today.
At one time, I also decided to take on a business partner. Choosing not to investigate his
character in advance was a poor decision on my part. Within a year, he'd misappropriated a quarter of
a million dollars and had run my corporation $758,000 in debt while I spent my life on the road doing
more than 200 seminars. Fortunately, though, I learned from my poor decision and made a better one.
In spite of advice from all the experts around me that the only way I could survive would be to declare
bankruptcy, I decided to find a way to turn things around, and I created one of the greater successes
of my life. I took my company to a whole new level, and what I learned from that experience not only
created my long-term business success, but also provided many of the distinctions for the NeuroAssociative Conditioning"* and Destiny Technologies™ that you'll be learning in this book.
"Life is either a daring adventure or nothing."
HELEN KELLER
So what is the single most important distinction to take from this chapter?
Know that it's your decisions, and not your conditions, that determine your destiny.
Before we learn the technology for changing how you think and how you feel every day of your life, I
want you to remember that, in the final analysis, everything you've read in this book is worthless . . .
every other book you've read or tape you've heard or seminar you've attended is worthless . . .
unless you decide to use it. Remember that a truly committed decision is the force that changes
your life. It's a power available to you in any moment if you just decide to use it.
Prove to yourself that you've decided now. Make one or two decisions that you've been putting
off: one easy decision and one that's a bit more difficult. Show yourself what you can do. Right now,
stop. Make at least one clear-cut decision that you've been putting off—take the first action toward
fulfilling it—and stick to it! By doing this, you'll be building that muscle that will give you the will to
change your entire life.
You and I both know that there are going to be challenges in your future. But as Lech Walesa
and the people of Eastern Europe have learned, if you've decided to get past the walls, you can climb
over them, you can break through them, you can tunnel under them, or you can find a door. No
matter how long a wall has stood, none has the power to withstand the continued force of human
beings who have decided to persist until it has fallen. The human spirit truly is unconquerable. But the
will to win, the will to succeed, to shape one's life, to take control, can only be harnessed when you
decide what you want, and believe that no challenge, no problem, no obstacle can keep you from it.
When you decide that your life will ultimately be shaped not by conditions, but by your decisions, then,
in that moment, your life will change forever, and you will be empowered to take control of...
3
THE FORCE THAT SHAPES YOUR LIFE
"Men live by intervals of reason under the sovereignty of humor and passion."
SIR THOMAS BROWNE
She had been jogging for only about half an hour when it happened. Suddenly a dozen young boys
began to sprint in her direction. Before she had time to realize what was happening, they pounced
upon her, pulled her into the bushes and began to beat her with a lead pipe. One boy continually
kicked her in the face until she was bleeding profusely. Then they raped and sodomized her, and left
her for dead.
I'm sure you've heard about this tragic, unthinkable crime that happened in Central Park several
years ago. I was in New York City the night it happened. I was appalled not only by the savagery of
the attack, but even more so to hear who the attackers were. They were children, from the ages of 14
to 17 years old. Contrary to stereotypes, they were neither poor nor did they come from abusive
families. They were boys from private schools. Little League players, kids who took tuba lessons. These
boys were not driven crazy by drugs, nor were they racially motivated. They assaulted and could have
killed this 28-year-old woman for one reason and one reason only: fun. They even had a name for
what they had set out to do; they called it "wilding."
Not more than 250 miles away in our nation's capital, a jet airliner crashed on takeoff from
National Airport during a blinding snowstorm. It hit the Potomac Bridge at the height of rush hour. As
traffic snarled to a halt, emergency rescue services were immediately dispatched to the scene, and the
bridge became a nightmare of chaos and panic. Firemen and paramedics were overwhelmed by the
destruction, and dove again and again into the Potomac to try and save crash victims. One man
repeatedly passed the life preserver to others. He saved many lives, but not his own. By the time the
rescue helicopter finally got to him, he had slipped beneath the icy surface of the water. This man gave
his life in order to save those of complete strangers! What drove him to place such a high value on
other people's lives—people he didn't even know—that he was willing to give his own life in the process?
What makes a person with a "good background" behave so savagely and without remorse while
another gives his own life to rescue complete strangers? What creates a hero, a heel, a criminal, a
contributor? What determines the difference in human actions? Throughout my life, I have
passionately sought the answer to these questions. One thing is clear to me: human beings are not
random creatures; everything we do, we do for a reason. We may not be aware of the reason
consciously, but there is undoubtedly a single driving force behind all human behavior. This force
impacts every facet of our lives, from our relationships and finances to our bodies and brains. What is
this force that is controlling you even now and will continue to do so for the rest of your life? PAIN
and PLEASURE! Everything you and I do, we do either out of our need to avoid pain or our desire to
gain pleasure.
So often I hear people talk about changes they want to make in their lives. But they can't get
themselves to follow through. They feel frustrated, overwhelmed, even angry with themselves because
they know they need to take action, but they can't get themselves to do it. There is one elementary
reason: they keep trying to change their behavior, which is the effect, instead of dealing with the
cause behind it.
Understanding and utilizing the forces of pain and pleasure will allow you once and for all to
create the lasting changes and improvements you desire for yourself and those you care about. Failure
to understand this force dooms you to a future of living in reaction, like an animal or a machine.
Perhaps this sounds like a complete oversimplification, but think about it. Why don't you do some of
the things you know you should do?
After all, what is procrastination? It's when you know you should do something, but you still
don't do it. Why not? The answer is simple: at some level you believe that taking action in this
moment would be more painful than just putting it off. Yet, have you ever had the experience of
putting something off for so long that suddenly you felt pressure to just do it, to get it done7 What
happened? You changed what you linked pain and pleasure to. Suddenly, not taking action became
more painful than putting it off. This is a common occurrence that many Americans experience around
April 14!
"A man who suffers before it is necessary, suffers more than is necessary."
SENECA
What keeps you from approaching that man or woman of your dreams? What keeps you from starting
that new business you've been planning for years? Why do you keep putting off that diet? Why do you
avoid completing your thesis? Why haven't you taken control of your financial investment portfolio?
What prevents you from doing whatever it takes to make your life exactly as you've imagined it?
Even though you know that all these actions would benefit you—that they could definitely bring
pleasure to your life—you fail to act simply because in that moment you associate more pain to doing
what's necessary than missing the opportunity. After all, what if you approached that person, and they
rejected you? What if you tried to start that new business but failed and lost the security you have in
your present job? What if you started a diet and went through the pain of starving yourself, only to
gain the weight back eventually anyway? What if you made an investment and lost your money? So
why even try?
For most people, the fear of loss is much greater than the desire for gain. Which would drive you
more: keeping someone from stealing the $100,000 you've earned over the last five years, or the
potential of earning $100,000 in the next five? The fact is that most people would work much harder to
hang on to what they have than they would to take the risks necessary to get what they really want
from their lives.
"The secret of success is learning how to use pain and pleasure instead of having pain and pleasure
use you. If you do that, you're in control of your life. If you don't, life controls you."
ANTHONY ROBBINS
Often an interesting question comes up in discussions about these twin powers that drive us: Why is it
that people can experience pain yet fail to change? They haven't experienced enough pain yet; they
haven't hit what I call emotional threshold. If you've ever been in a destructive relationship and
finally made the decision to use your personal power, take action and change your life, it was probably
because you hit a level of pain you weren't willing to settle for anymore. We've all experienced those
times in our lives when we've said, "I've had it—never again—this must change now." This is the
magical moment when pain becomes our friend. It drives us to take new action and produce new
results. We become even more powerfully compelled to act if, in that same moment, we begin to
anticipate how changing will create a great deal of pleasure for our lives as well.
This process is certainly not limited to relationships. Maybe you've experienced threshold with
your physical condition: you finally got fed up because you couldn't squeeze into an airline seat, you
couldn't fit into your clothes, and walking up a set of stairs winded you. Finally you said, "I've had it!"
and made a decision. What motivated that decision? It was the desire to remove pain from your life
and establish pleasure once again: the pleasure of pride, the pleasure of comfort, the pleasure of selfesteem, the pleasure of living life the way you've designed it.
Of course, there are many levels of pain and pleasure. For example, feeling a sense of
humiliation is a rather intense form of emotional pain. Feeling a sense of inconvenience is also pain. So
is boredom. Obviously some of these have less intensity, but they still factor in the equation of
decision-making. Likewise, pleasure weighs into this process. Much of our drive in life comes from our
anticipating that our actions will lead to a more compelling future, that today's work will be well worth
the effort, that the rewards of pleasure are near. Yet there are many levels of pleasure as well. For
example, the pleasure of ecstasy, while most would agree is intense, may sometimes be outweighed
by the pleasure of com- fort. It all depends on an individual's perspective.
For example, let's say you're on your lunch break, and you're walking past a park where a
Beethoven symphony is playing. Will you stop and listen? It depends, first of all, on the meaning you
associate to classical music. Some people would drop anything to be able to listen to the valiant strains
of the Eroica Symphony; for them, Beethoven equals pure pleasure. For others, however, listening to
any kind of classical music is about as exciting as watching paint dry. Enduring the music would equal
a measure of pain, and so they hurry past the park and back to work. But even some people who love
classical music would not decide to stop and listen. Maybe the perceived pain of being late for work
outweighs the pleasure they would get from hearing the familiar melodies. Or maybe they have a
belief that stopping and enjoying music in the middle of the afternoon is wasteful of precious time, and
the pain of doing something frivolous and inappropriate is greater than the pleasure the music could
bring. Each day our lives are filled with these kinds of psychic negotiations. We are constantly weighing
our own proposed actions and the impact they will have upon us.

LIFE'S MOST IMPORTANT LESSON
Donald Trump and Mother Teresa are driven by the exact same force. I can hear you saying, "Are you
off your rocker. Tony? They couldn't be more different!" It's absolutely true that their values lie at
opposite ends of the spectrum, but they're both driven by pain and pleasure. Their lives have been
shaped by what they've learned to get pleasure from, and what they've learned will create pain. The
most important lesson we learn in life is what creates pain for us and what creates pleasure. This
lesson is different for each of us and, therefore, so are our behaviors.
What's driven Donald Trump throughout his life? He's learned to achieve pleasure by having the
largest and most expensive yachts, acquiring the most extravagant buildings, making the shrewdest
deals—in short, accumulating the biggest and best toys. What did he learn to link pain to? In
interviews he has revealed that his ultimate pain in life is being second-best at anything—he equates it
with failure. In fact, his greatest drive to achieve comes from his compulsion to avoid this pain. It's a
far more powerful motivator than his desire to gain pleasure. Many competitors have taken great joy in
the pain that Trump has experienced from the collapse of much of his economic empire. Rather than
judge him—or anyone else, including yourself—it might be more valuable to understand what's driving
him and to have some compassion for his obvious pain.
By contrast, look at Mother Teresa. Here's a woman who cares so deeply that when she sees
other people in pain, she also suffers. Seeing the injustice of the caste system wounded her. She
discovered that when she took action to help these people, their pain disappeared, and so did hers. For
Mother Teresa, the ultimate meaning of life can be found in one of the most impoverished sections of
Calcutta, the City of Joy, which is swollen past the bursting point with millions of starving and diseased
refugees. For her, pleasure might mean wading through knee-deep muck, sewage and filth in order to
reach a squalid hut and minister to the infants and children within, their tiny bodies ravaged by cholera
and dysentery. She is powerfully driven by the sensation that helping others out of their misery helps
alleviate her own pain, that in helping them experience life in a better way—giving them pleasure—she
will feel pleasure. She learned that putting yourself on the line for others is the highest good; it gives
her a sense that her life has true meaning.
While it may be a stretch for most of us to liken the sublime humility of Mother Teresa to the
materialism of Donald Trump, it's critical to remember that these two individuals shaped their destinies
based upon what they linked pain and pleasure to. Certainly their backgrounds and environments
played a role in their choices, but ultimately they made conscious decisions about what to reward or
punish themselves for.

WHAT YOU LINK PAIN TO AND WHAT YOU LINK PLEASURE TO SHAPES YOUR DESTINY
One decision that has made a tremendous difference in the quality of my life is that at an early age I
began to link incredible pleasure to learning. I realized that discovering ideas and strategies that could
help me to shape human behavior and emotion could give me virtually everything I wanted in my life.
It could get me out of pain and into pleasure. Learning to unlock the secrets behind our actions could
help me to become more healthy, to feel better physically, to connect more deeply with the people I
cared about. Learning provided me with something to give, the opportunity to truly contribute
something of value to all those around me. It offered me a sense of joy and fulfillment. At the same
time, I discovered an even more powerful form of pleasure, and that was achieved by sharing what I'd
learned in a passionate way. When I began to see that what I could share helps people increase the
quality of their lives, I discovered the ultimate level of pleasure! And my life's purpose began to evolve.
What are some of the experiences of pain and pleasure that have shaped your life? Whether you've
linked pain or pleasure to drugs, for example, certainly has affected your destiny. So have the
emotions you've learned to associate to cigarettes or alcohol, relationships, or even the concepts of
giving or trusting.
If you're a doctor, isn't it true that the decision to pursue a medical career so many years ago
was motivated by your belief that becoming a physician would make you feel good? Every doctor I've
talked to links massive pleasure to helping people: stopping pain, healing illness, and saving lives.
Often the pride of being a respected member of society was an additional motivator. Musicians have
dedicated themselves to their art because few things can give them that same level of pleasure. And
CEOs of top organizations have learned to link pleasure to making powerful decisions that have a huge
potential to build something unique and to contribute to people's lives in a lasting way.
Think of the limiting pain and pleasure associations of John Belushi, Freddie Prinze, Jimi Hendrix,
Elvis Presley, Janis Joplin, and Jim Morrison. Their associations to drugs as an escape, a quick fix, or a
way out of pain and into temporary pleasure created their downfalls. They paid the ultimate price for
not directing their own minds and emotions. Think of the example they set for millions of fans. I never
did learn to consume drugs or alcohol. Is it because I was so brilliant? No, it's because I was very
fortunate. One reason I never drank alcohol is that, as a child, there were a couple of people in my
family who acted so obnoxiously when drunk that I associated extreme pain to drinking any alcohol.
One especially graphic image I have is the memory of my best friend's mom. She was extremely obese,
weighing close to 300 pounds, and she drank constantly. Whenever she did, she wanted to hug me
and drool all over me. To this day, the smell of alcohol on anyone's breath nauseates me.
Beer, though, was another story. When I was about eleven or twelve, I didn't consider it an
alcoholic drink. After all, my dad drank beer, and he didn't get that "obnoxious" or disgusting. In fact,
he seemed to be a little more fun when he'd had a few beers. Plus, I linked pleasure to drinking
because I wanted to be just like Dad. Would drinking beer really make me like Dad? No, but we
frequently create false associations in our nervous systems (neuro-associations) as to what will create
pain or pleasure in our lives.
One day I asked my mom for a "brew." She began arguing that it wasn't good for me. But trying
to convince me when my mind was made up, when my observations of my father so clearly
contradicted her, was not going to work. We don't believe what we hear; rather, we are certain that
our perceptions are accurate—and I was certain that day that drinking beer was the next step in my
personal growth. Finally, my mom realized I'd probably just go drink somewhere else if she didn't give
me an experience I wouldn't forget. At some level, she must have known she had to change what I
associated to beer. So she said, "Okay, you want to drink beer and be like Dad? Then you've really got
to drink beer just like your dad." I said, "Well, what does that mean?" She said, "You've got to drink a
whole six-pack." I said, "No problem."
She said, "You've got to drink it right here." When I took my first sip, it tasted disgusting,
nothing like what I'd anticipated. Of course, I wouldn't admit it at the time because, after all, my pride
was on the line. So I took a few more sips. After finishing one beer I said, "Now I'm really full, Mom."
She said, "No, here's another one," and popped it open. After the third or fourth can, I started feeling
sick to my stomach. I'm sure you can guess what happened next: I threw up all over myself and the
kitchen table. It was disgusting, and so was cleaning up the mess! I immediately linked the smell of
beer to the vomit and horrible feelings. I no longer had an intellectual association to what drinking
beer meant. I now had an emotional association in my nervous system, a gut-level neuro-association—
one that would clearly guide my future decisions. As a result, I've never had even a sip of beer since!
Can our pain and pleasure linkages produce a processional effect in our lives? You bet. This
negative neuro-association for beer affected many of my decisions in life. It influenced whom I hung
out with at school. It determined how I learned to get pleasure. I didn't use alcohol: I used learning; I
used laughter; I used sports. I also learned that it felt incredible to help other people, so I became the
guy in school everybody came to with their problems, and solving their problems made both them and
me feel good. Some things haven't changed through the years!
I also never used drugs because of a similar experience: when I was in the third or fourth grade,
the police department came to my school and showed us some films about the consequences of
getting involved in the drug scene. I watched as people shot up, passed out, spaced out, and leaped
out of windows. As a young boy, I associated drugs to ugliness and death, so I never tried them
myself. My good fortune was that the police had helped me form painful neuro-associations to even
the idea of using drugs. Therefore, I have never even considered the possibility.
What can we leam from this? Simply this: if we link massive pain to any behavior or
emotional pattern, we will avoid indulging in it at all costs. We can use this understanding
to harness the force of pain and pleasure to change virtually anything in our lives, from a
pattern of procrastinating to drug use. How do we do this? Let's say, for example, you want to keep
your children off drugs. The time to reach them is before they experiment and before someone else
teaches them the false association that drugs equal pleasure.
My wife, Becky, and I decided that the most powerful way to make sure our kids would never
use drugs was to cause them to link massive pain to drugs. We knew that unless we taught them what
drugs were really about, someone else might convince them that drugs were a useful way of escaping
pain.
To accomplish this task, I called upon an old friend. Captain John Rondon of the Salvation Army.
For years, I've supported John in the South Bronx and Brooklyn in helping street people make changes
in their lives by raising their standards, changing their limiting beliefs, and developing life skills. Becky
and I are very proud of the people who've used what we've taught to get off the streets and increase
the quality of their lives. I've always used my visits there as a way of giving something back and as a
reminder of how fortunate I am. It keeps me feeling appreciative of the life I have the privilege to lead.
It also gives me perspective and keeps my life balanced.
I explained my goals to Captain John, and he arranged to take my children on a tour they would
never forget, one that would give them a clear experience of what drugs do to the human spirit. It
began with a firsthand visit to a rat-infested, rotting tenement building. The minute we walked in, my
children were assaulted by the stench of urine-soaked floors, the sight of addicts shooting up heedless
of who was watching, child prostitutes soliciting passers-by, and the sound of neglected, crying
children. Mental, emotional, and physical devastation is what my kids learned to link to drugs. That
was four-and-a-half years ago. While they have all been exposed to drugs many times since, they
have never touched them. These powerful neuro-associations have significantly shaped their destinies.
"If you are distressed by anything external, the pain is not due to the thing itself but to your own
estimate of it; and this you have the power to revoke at any moment."
MARCUS AURELIUS
We are the only beings on the planet who lead such rich internal lives that it's not the events that
matter most to us, but rather, it's how we interpret those events that will determine how we think
about ourselves and how we will act in the future. One of the things that makes us so special is our
marvelous ability to adapt, to transform, to manipulate objects or ideas to produce something more
pleasing or useful. And foremost among our adaptive talents is the ability to take the raw experience
of our lives, relate it to other experiences, and create from it a kaleidoscopic tapestry of meaning
that's different from everyone else's in the world. Only human beings can, for example, change their
associations so that physical pain will result in pleasure, or vice-versa.
Remember a hunger striker confined to jail. Fasting for a cause, he survives thirty days without
food. The physical pain he experiences is considerable, but it's offset by the pleasure and validation of
drawing the world's attention to his cause. On a more personal, everyday level, individuals who follow
intense physical regimens in order to sculpt their bodies have learned to link tremendous feelings of
pleasure to the "pain" of physical exertion. They have converted the discomfort of discipline into the
satisfaction of personal growth. This is why their behavior is consistent, as are their results!
Through the power of our wills, then, we can weigh something like the physical pain of
starvation against the psychic pain of surrendering our ideals. We can create higher meaning; we can
step out of the "Skinnerian box"9* and take control. But if we fail to direct our own associations
to pain and pleasure, we're living no better than animals or machines, continually reacting to
our environment, allowing whatever comes up next to determine the direction and quality of our lives.
We're back in the box. It's as if we are a public computer, with easy access for lots of amateur
programmers!
Our behavior, both conscious and unconscious, has been rigged by pain and pleasure from so
many sources: childhood peers, moms and dads, teachers, coaches, movie and television heroes, and
the list goes on. You may or may not know precisely when programming and conditioning occurred. It

9

B.F. Skinner, a famous behavioral science pioneer, is also infamous for the crib-size box in which he confined his
daughter for the first eleven months of her life. He did this in the name of convenience and science, fueling his
theories about stimulus-response behaviors.
might have been something someone said, an incident at school, an award-winning sports event, an
embarrassing moment, straight A's on your report card—or maybe failing grades. All of these
contributed to who you are today. I cannot emphasize strongly enough that what you link pain
and pleasure to will shape your destiny.
As you review your own life, can you recall experiences that formed your neuro-associations and
thus set in motion the chain of causes and effects that brought you to where you are today? What
meaning do you attach to things? If you're single, do you look upon marriage wistfully as a joyous
adventure with your life's mate, or do you dread it as a heavy ball and chain? As you sit down to
dinner tonight, do you consume food matter-of-factly as an opportunity to refuel your body, or do you
devour it as your sole source of pleasure?
"Men, as well as women, are much oftener led by their hearts than by their understandings."
—LORD CHESTERFIELD
Though we'd like to deny it, the fact remains that what drives our behavior is instinctive reaction to
pain and pleasure, not intellectual calculation. Intellectually, we may believe that eating chocolate is
bad for us, but we'll still reach for it. Why? Because we're not driven so much by what we intellectually
know, but rather by what we've learned to link pain and pleasure to in our nervous systems. It's our
neuro-associations— the associations we've established in our nervous systems—that determine what
we'll do. Although we'd like to believe it's our intellect that really drives us, in most cases our
emotions—the sensations that we link to our thoughts—are what truly drive us.
Many times we try to override the system. For a while we stick to a diet; we've finally pushed
ourselves over the edge because we have so much pain. We will have solved the problem for the
moment—but if we haven't eliminated the cause of the problem, it will resurface. Ultimately,
in order for a change to last, we must link pain to our old behavior and pleasure to our new behavior,
and condition it until it's consistent. Remember, we will all do more to avoid pain than we will to gain
pleasure. Going on a diet and overriding our pain in the short term by pure willpower never lasts
simply because we still link pain to giving up fattening foods. For this change to be long-term, we've
got to link pain to eating those foods so that we no longer even desire them, and pleasure to eat more
of the foods that nourish us. People who are fit and healthy believe that nothing tastes as good as thin
feels! And they love foods that nourish them. In fact, they often link pleasure to pushing the
plate away with food still on it. It symbolizes to them that they're in control of their lives.
The truth is that we can learn to condition our minds, bodies, and emotions to link pain
or pleasure to whatever we choose. By changing what we link pain and pleasure to, we will
instantly change our behaviors. With smoking, for example, all you must do is link enough pain to
smoking and enough pleasure to quitting. You have the ability to do this right now, but you might not
exercise this capability because you've trained your body to link pleasure to smoking, or you fear that
stopping would be too painful. Yet, if you meet anyone who has stopped, you will find that this
behavior changed in one day: the day they truly changed what smoking meant to them.
IF YOU DON'T HAVE A PLAN FOR YOUR LIFE,
SOMEONE ELSE DOES
The mission of Madison Avenue is to influence what we link pain and pleasure to. Advertisers clearly
understand that what drives us is not so much our intellect as the sensations that we link to their
products. As a result, they've become experts in learning how to use exciting or soothing music, rapid
or elegant imagery, bright or subdued color, and a variety of other elements to put us in certain
emotional states; then, when our emotions are at their peak, when the sensations are their most
intense, they flash an image of their product continuously until we link it to these desired feelings.
Pepsi employed this strategy brilliantly in carving out a bigger share of the lucrative soft-drink
market from their major competitor, Coca-Cola. Pepsi observed the phenomenal success of Michael
Jackson, a young man who had spent his entire life learning how to heighten people's emotions by the
way he used his voice, his body, his face, and his gestures. Michael sang and danced in a way that
stimulated huge numbers of people to feel incredibly good—so much so that they'd often purchase one
of his albums to re-create the feelings. Pepsi asked. How can we transfer those sensations to our
product? Their reasoning was that if people associated the same pleasurable feelings to Pepsi as they
did to Michael Jackson, they'd buy Pepsi just as they bought his albums. The process of anchoring new
feelings to a product or idea is the integral transference necessary to basic conditioning, something
you'll learn more about in Chapter 6 as we study the science of Neuro-Associative Conditioning. But for
now, consider this: any time we're in an intense emotional state, when we're feeling strong
sensations of pain or pleasure, anything unique that occurs consistently will become
neurologically linked. Therefore, in the future, whenever that unique thing happens again, the
emotional state will return.
You've probably heard of Ivan Pavlov, a Russian scientist who, in the late nineteenth century,
conducted conditioned-response experiments. His most famous experiment was one in which he rang a
bell as he offered food to a dog, thereby stimulating the dog to salivate and pairing the dog's
sensations with the sound of the bell. After repeating the conditioning enough times, Pavlov found that
merely ringing the bell would cause the dog to salivate—even when food was no longer being given.
What does Pavlov have to do with Pepsi? First, Pepsi used Michael Jackson to get us in a peak
emotional state. Then, at that precise moment, they flashed the product. Continuous repetitions of
this created an emotional linkage for millions of Jackson's fans. The truth is that Michael Jackson
doesn't even drink Pepsi! And he wouldn't even hold an empty Pepsi can in his hand on camera! You
might wonder, "Isn't this company crazy? They hired a guy for $15 million to represent them who
doesn't even hold their product, and tells everybody that he won't! What kind of spokesperson is this?
What a crazy idea!" Actually, it was a brilliant idea. Sales went through the roof—so high that LA. Gear
then hired Michael for $20 million to represent their product. And today, because he's able to change
the way people feel (he's what I call a "state inducer") he and Sony/CBS just signed a 10-year
recording contract that's reputed to be worth more than $1 billion. His ability to change people's
emotional states makes him invaluable.
What we've got to realize is that this is all based on linking pleasurable sensations to specific
behaviors. It's the idea that if we use the product, we'll live our fantasies. Advertisers have taught all
of us that if you drive a BMW, then you're an extraordinary person with exceptional taste. If you drive
a Hyundai, you're intelligent and frugal. If you drive a Pontiac, you'll have excitement. If you drive a
Toyota, what a feeling you'll get! You're taught that if you wear Obsession cologne, you'll soon be
entwined in the throes of an androgynous orgy. If you drink Pepsi, you'll be able to jam with M.C.
Hammer as the epitome of hip. If you want to be a "good" mom, then you feed your children Hostess
fruit pies, cupcakes and Twinkles.
Advertisers have noted that if enough pleasure can be generated, consumers are often willing to
overlook the fear of pain. It is an advertising adage that "sex sells," and there's no question that the
pleasurable associations created in print and on TV by using sex do the job. Take a look at the trend in
selling blue jeans. What are blue jeans, anyway? They used to be work pants: functional, ugly. How
are they sold today? They've become an international icon of everything that's sexy, fashionable, and
youthful. Have you ever watched a Levi's 501 jeans commercial? Can you explain one to me? They
make no sense, do they? They're totally confusing. But at the end, you have the distinct impression
that sex took place nearby. Does this type of strategy really sell blue jeans? You bet! Levi is the
number-one blue-jeans manufacturer in America today.
Is the power of conditioning to shape our associations limited to products like soft drinks,
automobiles and blue jeans? Of course not. Take the lowly little raisin, for example. Do you know that
in 1986, the California Raisin Advisory Board was expecting a huge harvest, yet they were beginning to
panic? Year by year, they'd seen their sales dropping by 1 percent annually. In desperation they
turned to their advertising agency and asked what they could do. The solution was simple: they
needed to change people's feelings about raisins. For most people, raisins were considered wimpy,
lonely, and dull, according to Robert Phinney, the former director of the raisin board.* The task was
clear: pump a healthy dose of emotional appeal into the shriveled-up fruit. Link up sensations that
people wanted. "Shriveled" and "dried" are not the sensations that most people associate with feeling
good about their lives. The raisin growers kept thinking. What can we associate to raisins that would
make people really want to buy them?
At the time, an old Motown hit was enjoying a national resurgence: "I Heard It Through the
Grapevine." Raisin growers thought. What if we can take these sensations that make so many people
feel good, and link them to raisins to make them seem hip? They hired an innovative animator named
Will Vinton who then created about thirty clay raisin figurines, each with a distinct personality, to
boogie to the Motown tune. In those moments, the California Raisins were born. Their first ad
campaign created an instant sensation and successfully linked the sensations that the raisin growers
hoped for. As people watched the hip little raisins dance, they linked strong feelings of fun, humor, and
pleasure to the once boring fruit. The raisin had been reinvented as the essence of California cool, and
the unspoken message of each of these ads was that if you ate them you'd be hip, too. The upshot?
The raisin industry was rescued from its devastating slump in sales to a 20 percent growth factor
annually. The raisin growers had succeeded in changing people's associations: instead of linking
boredom to the fruit, consumers had learned to link sensations of excitement and fun!
Of course, the use of advertising as a form of conditioning is not limited to physical products.
Fortunately or unfortunately, we consistently see television and radio used as tools for changing what
we associate to candidates in the political process. No one knows this better than the master political
analyst and opinion-shaper Roger Ailes, who was responsible for key elements of Ronald Reagan's
successful 1984 campaign against Walter Mondale, and who in 1988 masterminded George Bush's
successful campaign against Michael Dukakis. Ailes designed a strategy to convey three specifically
negative messages about Dukakis—that he was soft on defense, the environment, and crime—and
cause people to link painful sensations to him. One ad portrayed Dukakis as a "kid playing war" in a
tank; another seemed to blame him for pollution in the Boston Harbor. The most notorious one showed
criminals being released from Massachusetts jails through a revolving door, and played on the
widespread negative publicity generated around the country by the "Willie Horton incident." Convicted
murderer Willie Horton, released from jail as part of a controversial furlough program in Dukakis's
home state, failed to return and ten months later was arrested for terrorizing a young couple, raping
the woman and assaulting the man.
Many people took issue with the negative focus of these ads. Personally, I found them highly
manipulative. But it's hard to argue with their level of success, based on the fact that people do more
to avoid pain than to gain pleasure. Many people didn't like the way the campaign was fought—and
George Bush was one of those people—but it was hard to argue with the reality that pain was a very
powerful motivator in shaping people's behavior. As Ailes says, "The negative ads cut through quicker.
People tend to pay more attention to [these types of ads]. People may or may not slow down to look at
a beautiful pastoral scene along the highway. But everyone looks at an auto accident."* There is no
questioning the effectiveness of Ailes's strategy. Bush won a clear majority of the popular vote and
soundly trounced Dukakis in one of the biggest landslides in electoral college history.
The force shaping world opinion and consumer's buying habits is also the same force that shapes
all of our actions. It's up to you and me to take control of this force and decide on our own actions
consciously, because if we don't direct our own thoughts, we'll fall under the influence of those who
would condition us to behave in the way they desire. Sometimes those actions are what we would
have selected anyway; sometimes not. Advertisers understand how to change what we link pain and
pleasure to by changing the sensations we associate to their products. If we want to take control of
our lives, we must learn to "advertise" in our own minds—and we can do this in a moment. How?
Simply by linking pain to the behaviors we want to stop at such a high level of emotional intensity that
we won't even consider those behaviors any longer. Aren't there things you would never, ever do?
Think of the sensations you link to those. If you link those same feelings and sensations to the
behaviors you want to avoid, you'll never do them again, either. Then, simply link pleasure to the new
behavior you desire for yourself. Through repetition and emotional intensity, you can condition these
behaviors within yourself until they are automatic.
So what's the first step in creating a change? The first step is simply becoming aware of the
power that pain and pleasure exert over every decision, and therefore every action, that we take. The
art of being aware is understanding that these linkages—between ideas, words, images, sounds, and
sensations of pain and pleasure— are happening constantly.
"I conceive that pleasures are to be avoided if greater pains be the consequence, and pains to be
coveted that will terminate in greater pleasures."
—MICHEL DE MONTAIGNE
The problem is that most of us base our decisions about what to do on what's going to create pain or
pleasure in the short term instead of the long term. Yet, in order to succeed, most of the things that
we value require us to be able to break through the wall of short-term pain in order to have long-term
pleasure. You must put aside the passing moments of terror and temptation, and focus on what's most
important in the long term: your values and personal standards. Remember, too, that it's not actual
pain that drives us, but our fear that something will lead to pain. And it's not actual pleasure that
drives us, but our belief—our sense of certainty—that somehow taking a certain action will lead to
pleasure. We're not driven by the reality, but by our perception of reality.
Most people focus on how to avoid pain and gain pleasure in the short term, and thereby create
long term pain for themselves. Let's consider an example. Say someone wants to lose a few extra
pounds. (I know this has never happened to you, but let's just pretend anyway!) On the one hand,
this person marshals a host of excellent reasons for losing weight: they would feel healthier and more
energized; they would fit into their clothes better; they would feel more confident around members of
the opposite sex. On the other hand, though, there are just as many reasons to avoid losing weight:
they'd have to go on a diet; they'd continually feel hungry; they'd have to deny their urge to eat
fattening foods; and besides, why not wait until after the holidays?
With the reasons balanced in this way, many people would tip the scales in favor of the pattern
of putting things off—the potential pleasure of a slimmer figure far outweighed by the short-term pain
of dietary deprivation. Short term, we avoid the pain of feeling a twinge of hunger, and instead we
give ourselves that immediate morsel of pleasure by indulging in a few potato chips, but it doesn't last.
In the long term, we feel worse and worse about ourselves, not to mention the fact that it causes our
health to deteriorate.
Remember, anything you want that's valuable requires that you break through some short-term
pain in order to gain long-term pleasure. If you want a great body, you've got to sculpt that body,
which requires breaking through short-term pain. Once you've done it enough times, working out
becomes pleasurable. Dieting works the same way. Any type of discipline requires breaking through
pain: discipline in business, relationships, personal confidence, fitness, and finances. How do you break
through the discomfort and create the momentum to really accomplish your aims? Start by making the
decision to overcome it. We can always decide to override the pain in the moment, and better yet is to
follow up by conditioning ourselves, which is something we'll cover in detail in Chapter 6.
A prime example of how this short-term focus can cause us all to take a fall (as in Niagara) is
reflected by the current savings-and-loan crisis—probably the single biggest financial mistake ever
made in the history of our government. Estimates show it could cost taxpayers more than $500 billion,
yet most Americans have no idea what caused it. * This problem will most certainly be one that is the
source of pain—at least economic pain—for every man, woman and child in this country, probably for
generations to come. In a conversation I had with L William Seidman, chairman of the Resolution Trust
Corporation and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, he told me, "We are the only nation rich
enough to survive such a big mistake." What did create this financial mess? It's a classic example of
trying to eliminate pain by solving a problem while nurturing the cause.
It all began with savings and loan challenges that came up in the late seventies and early
eighties. Banking and S&L institutions had built their business primarily on the corporate and consumer
market. For a bank to profit, it has to make loans, and those loans have to be at an interest rate that's
above what it pays out to depositors. In the first stages of the problem, the banks faced difficulties on
several fronts. First, they were hit hard when corporations entered what had previously been the sole
domain of banks: lending. Large companies found that by lending to one another, they saved
significantly on interest, developing what's now known as the "commercial paper market." This was so
successful that it virtually destroyed the profit centers of many banks.
Meanwhile, there were new developments on the American consumer front as well. Traditionally,
consumers did not look forward to meeting with a loan officer at a bank, meekly asking for loans to
purchase a car or large appliance. I think we can fairly say that this was a painful experience for most
as they subjected themselves to financial scrutiny. They didn't usually feel like a "valued customer" at
many banks. Car companies were smart enough to recognize this and began offering loans to their
customers, creating a new source of profit for themselves. They saw that they could make as much
money on the financing as they did on the car they sold, and they could give the customer a great deal
of convenience and lower interest rates. Their attitude was, of course, quite different from the
bankers'—they had a vested interest in seeing the customer get his loan. Soon, the customers came to
prefer the in-house financing over the traditional method, appreciating the convenience, flexibility, and
low financing fees. Everything was handled in one place by a courteous person who wanted their
business. Consequently, General Motors Acceptance Corporation (GMAC) quickly became one of the
largest car-financing companies in the country.
One of the last bastions for bank loans was the real estate market, but interest rates and
inflation had soared in one year as high as 18 percent. As a result, no one could afford the monthly
payments that servicing loans at this interest rate required. As you can imagine, real estate loans
dropped off the map.
By this time, the banks had lost their corporate customers en masse, they had lost the market
for a great deal of their car loans, and they had begun to lose the home loans as well. The final slap to
the banks was that the depositors, in response to inflation, needed a higher rate of return while the
banks were still carrying loans that would yield significantly lower interest rates. Every day, the banks
were losing money; they saw their survival at stake and decided to do two things. First, they lowered
their standards for qualifying customers for loans. Why? Because they believed that if they didn't lower
their standards, there would be no one to loan money to. And if they didn't loan money, they couldn't
profit, and they'd clearly have pain. If, however, they were able to loan money to someone who paid
them back, they'd have pleasure. Plus, there was very little risk. If they loaned money and the lendee
didn't meet the obligation, then the taxpayers, namely you and I, would bail them out anyway. So in
the final analysis, there was very little fear of pain and tremendous incentive to "risk" their (our?)
capital.
These banks and S&Ls also pressured Congress to help keep them from going under, and a
series of changes occurred. Large banks realized that they could loan money to foreign nations that
were desperately hungry for capital. The lenders realized that over breakfast they could commit more
than $50 million to a country. They didn't have to work with millions of consumers to lend the same
amount, and the profits on these larger loans were sizable. The bank managers and loan officers were
also often given bonuses in relation to the size and number of loans they could produce. The banks
were no longer focusing on the quality of a loan. Their focus was not on whether a country like Brazil
could pay the loan back or not, and frankly, many weren't terribly concerned. Why? They did exactly
what we taught them: we encouraged them to be gamblers with the Federal Deposit Insurance,
promising that if they won, they won big, and if they failed, we would pick up the tab. There was
simply too little pain in this scenario for the banker.
Smaller banks, who didn't have the resources to loan to foreign countries, found that the next
best thing was to loan to commercial developers here in the United States. They, too, lowered their
standards so that developers could borrow with no money down instead of the traditional 20 percent.
What was the developers' response? Well, they had nothing on the line, they were using only other
people's money, and at the same time Congress had built such high tax incentives into commercial
building that the builders had absolutely nothing to lose. They no longer had to analyze whether the
market was right, or whether the building was properly located or sized. The developers' only
"downside" was that they would have the most incredible tax write-off of their lives.
As a result, builders built like crazy, causing a glut on the market. When the supply was so much
greater than the demand, the market collapsed. Developers went back to the banks and said, "We
can't pay," and the banks turned to the taxpayers and said, "We can't pay." Unfortunately, there's
nobody we can turn to. What's worse, people have seen the abuse in this country, and the assumption
now is that anyone who is wealthy must have taken advantage of somebody. This is creating negative
attitudes toward many in business who are often the very people providing jobs that allow Americans'
dreams to flourish. This whole mess illustrates our lack of understanding of the pain-pleasure dynamic
and the inadvisability of trying to conquer long-term problems with short-term solutions.
Pain and pleasure are also the backstage directors of global drama. For years we lived through
an escalating arms race with the USSR. The two nations were constantly building more weapons as the
ultimate threat: "If you try to hurt us, we'll retaliate and hurt you even worse." And the standoff
continued to build to the point at which we were spending $15,000 a second on arms. What caused
Gorbachev to suddenly decide to renegotiate arms reduction? The answer is pain. He began to
associate massive pain to the idea of trying to compete with our military arms buildup. Financially it
just wasn't feasible; he couldn't even feed his people! When people can't eat, they're more concerned
about their stomachs than about guns. They're more interested in filling their larders than the
country's armament. They begin to believe that money is being spent frivolously, and they insist on a
change. Did Gorbachev change his position because he's a great guy? Maybe. But one thing is certain:
he didn't have a choice.
"Nature has placed mankind under the government of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure . ..
they govern us in all we do, in all we say, in all we think: every effort we can make to throw off our
subjection, will serve but to demonstrate and confirm it."
JEREMY BENTHAM
Why do people persist in an unsatisfying relationship, unwilling either to work toward solutions or end
it and move on? It's because they know changing will lead to the unknown, and most people believe
that the unknown will be much more painful than what they're already experiencing. It's like the old
proverbs say: "Better the devil you know than the devil you don't know," "A bird in the hand is worth
two in the bush." These core beliefs keep us from taking the actions that could change our lives.
If we want to have art intimate relationship, then we have to overcome our fears of rejection
and vulnerability. If we're planning to go into business, we must be willing to overcome our fear of
losing security to make that happen. In fact, most of the things that are valuable in our lives require
us to go against the basic conditioning of our nervous systems. We must manage our fears by
overriding this preconditioned set of responses and, in many cases, we must transform that fear into
power. Many times, the fear that we are allowing to control us never becomes reality anyway. It's
possible for people to link pain, for example, to flying in an airplane, while there's no logical reason for
the phobia. They're responding to a painful experience in their past or even an imagined future. They
may have read in the papers about airplane accidents, and now they avoid getting on planes: they're
allowing that fear to control them. We must make sure that we live our lives in the present and
respond to things that are real, not to our fears of what once was or what might someday be. The key
thing to remember is that we don't move away from real pain; we move away from what we believe
will lead to pain.

LET'S MAKE SOME CHANGES RIGHT NOW
First, write down four actions that you need to take that you've been putting off. Maybe you need to
lose some weight. Maybe you need to stop smoking. Maybe you need to communicate with someone
you've had a falling out with, or reconnect with someone who's important to you.
Second, under each of these actions, write down the answer to the following questions: Why
haven't I taken action? In the past, what pain have I linked to taking this action? Answering these
questions will help you understand that what has held you back is that you've associated greater pain
to taking the action than to not taking it. Be honest with yourself. If you're thinking, "I have no pain
associated to it," think a little harder. Maybe the pain is simple: maybe it's the pain of taking time out
of your busy schedule.
Third, write down all the pleasure you've had in the past by indulging in this negative pattern.
For example, if you think you should lose some weight, why have you continued to eat whole pans of
brownies and bulk-size bags of chips, and to guzzle twelve-packs of soda pop? You're avoiding the pain
of depriving yourself, yes, and at the same time you're really doing this because it makes you feel
good right now. It gives you pleasure! Instant pleasure! No one wants to give up these feelings! In
order to create a change that will last, we need to find a new way to get the same pleasure without
any negative consequences. Identifying the pleasure you've been getting will help you know what your
target is.
Fourth, write down what it will cost you if you don't change now. What will happen if you don't
stop eating so much sugar and fat? If you don't stop smoking? If you don't make that phone call that
you know you need to make? If you don't start consistently working out each day? Be honest with
yourself. What's it going to cost you over the next two, three, four, five years? What's it going to cost
you emotionally? What's it going to cost you in terms of your self-image? What will it cost you in your
physical energy level? What will it cost you in your feelings of self-esteem? What will it cost you
financially? What will it cost you in your relationships with the people you care about most? How does
that make you feel? Don't just say, "It will cost me money" or "I will be fat." That's not enough. You've
got to remember that what drives us is our emotions. So get associated and use pain as your friend,
one that can drive you to a new level of success.
The final step is to write down all the pleasure you'll receive by taking each of these actions right
now. Make a huge list that will drive you emotionally, that will really get you excited: "I'll gain the
feeling of really being in control of my life, of knowing that I'm in charge. I'll gain a new level of selfconfidence. I'll gain physical vitality and health. I'll be able to strengthen all my relationships. I'll
develop more willpower which I could use in every other area of my life. My life will be better in all
these ways, now. Over the next two, three, four, five years. By taking this action, I will live my
dream." Envision all the positive impacts both in the present and in the long term.
I encourage you to take the time now to complete this exercise, and to take advantage of the
great momentum you've been building up as you've moved through this book. Carpe diem! Seize the
day! There's no time like the present. But if you can't wait another second before pressing on to the
next chapter, then by all means, do so. Just be sure to come back to this exercise later and
demonstrate to yourself the control you have over the twin powers of pain and pleasure.
This chapter has shown you again and again that what we link pain to and pleasure to shapes
every aspect of our lives and that we have the power to change these associations and, therefore, our
actions and our destinies. But in order to do this, we must understand . . .
4
BELIEF SYSTEMS:
THE POWER TO
CREATE
AND THE POWER
TO DESTROY
"Under all that we think, lives all we believe,
like the ultimate veil of our spirits."
—ANTONIO MACHADO
He was bitter and cruel, an alcoholic and drug addict who almost killed himself several times. Today he
serves a life sentence in prison for the murder of a liquor store cashier who "got in his way." He has
two sons, born a mere eleven months apart, one of whom grew up to be "just like Dad": a drug addict
who lived by stealing and threatening others until he, too, was put in jail for attempted murder. His
brother, however, is a different story: a man who's raising three kids, enjoys his marriage, and
appears to be truly happy. As regional manager for a major national concern, he finds his work both
challenging and rewarding. He's physically fit, and has no alcohol or drug addictions! How could these
two young men have turned out so differently, having grown up in virtually the same environment?
Both were asked privately, unbeknownst to the other, "Why has your life turned out this way?"
Surprisingly, they both provided the exact same answer: "What else could I have become, having
grown up with a father like that?" So often we're seduced into believing that events control our lives
and that our environment has shaped who we are today. No greater lie was ever told. It's not the
events of our lives that shape us, but our beliefs as to what those events mean. Two men are shot
down in Vietnam and imprisoned in the infamous Hoa Lo prison. They are isolated, chained to cement
slabs, and continuously beaten with rusty shackles and tortured for information. Yet although these
men are receiving the same abuse, they form radically different beliefs about their experience. One
man decides that his life is over, and in order to avoid any additional pain, commits suicide. The other
pulls from these brutalizing events a deeper belief in himself, his fellow man, and his Creator than he's
ever had before. Captain Gerald Coffee uses his experience of this to remind people all over the world
of the power of the human spirit to overcome virtually any level of pain, any challenge, or any problem.
Two women turn seventy years old, yet each takes a different meaning from the event. One "knows"
that her life is coming to an end. To her, seven decades of living mean that her body must be breaking
down and she'd better start winding up her affairs. The other woman decides that what a person is
capable of at any age depends upon her belief, and sets a higher standard for herself. She decides that
mountain climbing might be a good sport to begin at the age of seventy. For the next twenty five
years she devotes herself to this new adventure in mastery, scaling some of the highest peaks in the
world, until today, in her nineties, Hulda Crooks has become the oldest woman to ascend Mount Fuji.
You see, it's never the environment; it's never the events of our lives, but the meaning we attach to
the events—how we interpret them—that shapes who we are today and who we'll become tomorrow.
Beliefs are what make the difference between a lifetime of joyous contribution and one of misery and
devastation. Beliefs are what separate a Mozart from a Manson. Beliefs are what cause some
individuals to become heroes, while others "lead lives of quiet desperation." What are our beliefs
designed for? They're the guiding force to tell us what will lead to pain and what will lead to pleasure.
Whenever something happens in your life, your brain asks two questions: 1) Will this mean pain or
pleasure? 2) What must I do now to avoid pain and/or gain pleasure? The answers to these two
questions are based on our beliefs, and our beliefs are driven by our generalizations about what we've
learned could lead to pain and pleasure. These generalizations guide all of our actions and thus the
direction and quality of our lives. Generalizations can be very useful; they are simply the identification
of similar patterns. For example, what allows you to open a door?. You look down at a handle and,
although you've never seen this specific one before, you can generally feel certain that this door will
open if you turn the handle right or left, if you push or pull it. Why do you believe this? Simply, your
experience of doors has provided enough references to create a sense of certainty that allows you to
follow through. Without this sense of certainty, we would virtually be unable to leave the house, drive
our cars, use a telephone, or do any one of the dozens of things we do in a day. Generalizations
simplify our lives and allow us to function. Unfortunately, generalizations in more complex areas of
our lives can oversimplify and sometimes create limiting beliefs. Maybe you've failed to follow through
on various endeavors a few times in your life, and based on that, you developed a belief that you are
incompetent. Once you believe this is true, it can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. You may say, "Why
even try if I'm not going to follow through anyway?" Or perhaps you've made a few poor decisions in
business or in relationships, and have interpreted that to mean you will always "sabotage" yourself. Or
maybe in school you didn't learn as quickly as you thought other kids did, and rather than considering
the idea that you had a different learning strategy, you may have decided that you were "learningdisabled." On another level, isn't racial prejudice fueled by a wholesale generalization about an entire
group of people? The challenge with all these beliefs is that they become limitations for future
decisions about who you are and what you're capable of. We need to remember that most of our
beliefs are generalizations about our past, based on our interpretations of painful and pleasurable
experiences. The challenge is threefold: 1) most of us do not consciously decide what we're going to
believe; 2) often our beliefs are based on misinterpretation of past experiences; and 3) once we adopt
a belief, we forget it's merely an interpretation. We begin to treat our beliefs as if they're realities, as if
they are gospel. In fact, we rarely, if ever, question our long-held beliefs. If you ever wonder why
people do what they do, again, you need to remember that human beings are not random creatures:
all of our actions are the result of our beliefs. Whatever we do, it is out of our conscious or unconscious
beliefs about what will lead to pleasure or away from pain. If you want to create long-term and
consistent changes in your behaviors, you must change the beliefs that are holding you back.
Beliefs have the power to create and the power to destroy. Human beings have the awesome ability to
take any experience of their lives and create a meaning that disempowers them or one that can
literally10 save their lives. Some people have taken the pain of their past and said, "Because of this, I
will help others. Because I was raped11, no one else will be harmed again." Or, "Because I lost my son
or daughter, I will make a difference in the world." It's not something they wanted to believe, but
rather, adopting this type of belief was a necessity for them to be able to pick up the pieces and move
on to live empowering lives. We all have the capacity to create meanings that empower us, but so
many of us never tap into it, or even recognize it. If we don't adopt the faith that there is a reason for
the unexplainable tragedies of life, then we begin to destroy our capacity to truly live. The need to be
able to create a meaning out of life's most painful experiences was observed by psychiatrist Viktor
Franki as he and other Holocaust victims survived the horrors of Auschwitz and other concentration
camps. Franki noted that those special few who were able to make it through this "hell on earth"
shared one thing in common: they were able to endure and transform their experience by finding an
empowering meaning for their pain. They developed the belief that because they suffered and survived,
they would be able to tell the story and make certain that no human being would ever suffer this way
again. Beliefs are not limited to impacting our emotions or actions. They can literally change our
bodies in a matter of moments. I had the pleasure of interviewing Yale professor and best-selling
author Dr. Bernie Siegel. As we began to speak about the power of belief, Bernie shared with me some
of the research he'd done on people with Multiple Personality Disorders. Incredibly, the potency of
these people's beliefs that they had become a different person resulted in an unquestioned command
to their nervous system to make measurable changes in their biochemistry. The result? Their bodies
would literally transform before the researchers' eyes and begin to reflect a new identity at a moment's
notice. Studies document such remarkable occurrences as patients' eye color actually changing as
their personality changes, or physical marks disappearing and reappearing! Even diseases such as
diabetes or high blood pressure come and go depending on the person's belief as to which personality
they're manifesting. Beliefs even have the capacity to override the impact of drugs on the body. While
most people believe that drugs heal, studies in the new science of psychoneuroimmunology (the mindbody relationship) have begun to bear out what many others have suspected for centuries: our beliefs
about the illness and its treatment play as significant a role, maybe an even more significant role, than
the treatment itself. Dr. Henry Beecher from Harvard University has done extensive research that
clearly demonstrates that we often give credit to a drug, when in reality it's the patient's belief that
makes the difference. One demonstration of this was a groundbreaking experiment in which 100
medical students were asked to participate in testing two new drugs. One was described to them as a
super-stimulant in a red capsule, the other as a super-tranquilizer in a blue capsule. Unbeknownst to
the students, the contents of the capsules had been switched: the red capsule was actually a
barbiturate, and the blue capsule was actually an amphetamine. Yet half of the students developed
physical reactions that went along with their expectations—exactly the opposite of the chemical
reaction the drugs should have produced in their bodies! These students were not just given placebos;

10
11

literal (wort)wörtlich; genau; prosaisch
rape vergewaltigen; Vergewaltigung
they were given actual drugs. But their beliefs overrode the chemical impact of the drug on their
bodies. As Dr. Beecher later stated, a drug's usefulness "is a direct result of not only the chemical
properties of the drug, but also the patient's belief in the usefulness and effectiveness of the drug."
"Drugs are not always necessary, [but] belief in recovery always is."
-ORMAN COUSINS
I had the privilege of knowing Norman Cousins for almost seven years, and I was fortunate enough to
have the last taped interview with him just one month before he passed on. In that interview, he
shared a story about how strongly our beliefs affect our physical bodies. At a football game in
Monterey Park, a Los Angeles suburb, several people experienced the symptoms of food poisoning. The
examining physician deduced that the cause was a certain soft drink from the dispensing machines
because all of his patients had purchased some prior to becoming ill. An announcement was made over
the loudspeaker requesting that no one patronize12 the dispensing machine, saying some people had
become ill and describing the symptoms. Pandemonium immediately broke out in the stands as
people retched and fainted in droves. Even a few people who had not even gone near the machine
became ill! Ambulances from local hospitals did a booming business that day, as they drove back and
forth to the stadium, transporting multitudes of stricken fans. When it was discovered that the
dispensing machine was not the culprit13, people immediately and "miraculously" recovered. We need
to realize that our beliefs have the capacity to make us sick or make us healthy in a moment. Beliefs
have been documented to affect our immune systems. And most importantly, beliefs can either give us
the resolve to take action, or weaken and destroy our drive. In this moment beliefs are shaping how
you respond to what you've just read and what you're going to do with what you're learning in this
book. Sometimes we develop beliefs that create limitations or strengths within a very specific context;
for instance, how we feel about our ability to sing or dance, fix a car, or do calculus. Other beliefs are
so generalized that they dominate virtually every aspect of our lives, either negatively or positively. I
call these global beliefs. Global beliefs are the giant beliefs we have about everything in our lives:
beliefs about our identities, people, work, time, money, and life itself, for that matter. These giant
generalizations are often phrased as is/am/are: "Life is . . ." "I am . . ." "People are ..." As you can
imagine, beliefs of this size and scope can shape and color every aspect of our lives. The good news
about this is that making one change in a limiting global belief you currently hold can change virtually
every aspect of your life in a moment! Remember: Once accepted, our beliefs become unquestioned
commands to our nervous systems, and they have the power to expand or destroy the possibilities of
our present and future.
If we want to direct our lives, then, we must take conscious control over our beliefs. And in order to do
that, we first need to understand what they really are and how they are formed.
WHAT IS A BELIEF?
12
patronize fördern; (Stamm)Kunde oder Stammgast sein bei oder in (Dativ); gönnerhaft oder herablassend
behandeln
13
culprit Schuldige(r), Täter(in)
What is a belief, anyway? Often in life we talk about things without having a clear idea of what they
really are. Most people treat a belief as if it's a thing, when really all it is is a feeling of certainty
about something. If you say you believe that you're intelligent, all you're really saying is, "I feel certain
that I'm intelligent." That sense of certainty allows you to tap into resources that allow you to produce
intelligent results. We all have the answers inside of us for virtually anything—or at least we have
access to the answers we need through others. But often our lack of belief, our lack of certainty,
causes us not to be able to use the capacity that resides within us.
A simple way of understanding a belief is to think about its basic building block: an idea. There are a
lot of ideas you may think about but not really believe. Let's take, for example, the idea that you're
sexy. Stop for a second and say to yourself, "I'm sexy." Now, whether it's an idea or a belief will come
down to the amount of certainty you feel about this phrase as you say it. If you think, "Well, I'm not
really sexy," what you're really saying is, "I don't feel very certain that I'm sexy."
How do we turn an idea into a belief? Let me offer you a simple metaphor to describe the process. If
you can think of an idea as being like a tabletop with no legs, you'll have a fair representation of why
an idea doesn't feel as certain as a belief. Without any legs, that tabletop won't even stand up by itself.
Belief, on the other hand, has legs. If you really believe, "I'm sexy," how do you know you're sexy?
Isn't it true that you have some references to support the idea—some experiences in life to back it up?
Those are the legs that make your tabletop solid, that make your belief certain.
What are some of the reference experiences you've had? Maybe men and women have told you that
you're sexy. Or maybe you look at yourself in the mirror, compare your image to that of those whom
other people consider sexy, and say, "Hey, I look like them!" Or maybe strangers on the street call out
and wave14 to you. All these experiences mean nothing until you organize them under the idea that
you're sexy. As you do this, the legs make you feel solid about the idea and cause you to begin to
believe it. Your idea feels certain and is now a belief.
Once you understand this metaphor, you can begin to see how your beliefs are formed, and get a hint
of how you can change them as well. First, though, it's important to note that we can develop beliefs
about anything if we just find enough legs—enough reference experiences—to build it up. Think about
it. Isn't it true that you have enough experiences in your life, or know enough other people who have
gone through tough times with other human beings, that if you really wanted to you could easily
develop the belief that people are rotten and, given half a chance, would take advantage of you?
Maybe you don't want to believe this, and we've already discussed that it would be disempowering, but
don't you have experiences that could back up this idea and make you feel certain about it if you
wanted to? Isn't it also true that you have experiences in life—references—to back up the idea that if
you really care about people and treat them well, they are basically good and will want to help you too?
The question is: which one of these beliefs is the true belief? The answer is that it doesn't matter
which one is true. What matters is which one is most empowering. We all can find someone to back up
our belief and make us feel more solid about it. This is how human beings are able to rationalize. The
key question, again, is whether this belief is strengthening or weakening us, empowering or
disempowering us on a daily basis. So what are the possible sources of references in our lives?
14

wave at someone, wave to someone jemandem zuwinken
Certainly, we can pull from our personal experiences. Sometimes we gather references through
information we get from other people, or from books, tapes, movies, and so on. And sometimes we
form references based solely on our imagination. The emotional intensity we feel about any of these
references will definitely affect the strength and width of the leg. The strongest and most solid legs are
formed by personal experiences that we have a lot of emotion attached to because they were painful
or pleasurable experiences. The other factor is the number of references we have—obviously, the more
reference experiences supporting an idea, the stronger your belief will be in it.
Do your references have to be accurate in order for you to be willing to use them? No, they can be real
or imaginary, accurate or inaccurate—even our own personal experiences, as solidly as we feel about
them, are distorted by our own personal perspective.
Because human beings are capable of such distortion and invention, the reference legs we can use to
assemble our beliefs are virtually unlimited. The downside of this is that, regardless of where our
references come from, we begin to accept them as real and thus no longer question them! This can
have very powerful negative consequences depending upon the beliefs we adopt. By the same token,
we have the ability to use imagined references to propel us in the direction of our dreams. People
can succeed if they imagine something vividly enough just as easily as if they had the actual
experiences. That's because our brains can't tell the difference between something we've vividly
imagined and something we've actually experienced. With enough emotional intensity and repetition,
our nervous systems experience something as real, even if it hasn't occurred yet. Every great achiever
I've ever interviewed has had the ability to get themselves to feel certain they could succeed, even
though no one before them had ever accomplished it. They've been able to create references where no
references existed and achieve what seemed to be impossible.
Anyone who uses a computer is likely to recognize the name "Microsoft." What most people don't
realize is that Bill Gates, the co-founder of that company, was not just some genius who got lucky, but
a person who put himself on the line with no references to back up his belief. When he found out that
an Albuquerque company was developing something called a "personal computer" that needed BASIC
software, he called them up and promised to deliver it, even though he had no such thing at the time.
Once he had committed himself, he had to find a way. His ability to create a sense of certainty was his
real genius. Many people were just as intelligent as he was, but he used his certainty to be able to tap
into his resources, and within a few weeks he and a partner had written a language that made the
personal computer a reality. By putting himself on the line and finding a way. Bill Gates set in motion
that day a series of events that would change the way people do business, and became a billionaire by
the time he was thirty years old. Certainty carries power!
Do you know the story of the four-minute mile? For thousands of years, people held the belief that it
was impossible for a human being to run the mile in less than four minutes. But in 1954, Roger
Bannister broke this imposing15 belief barrier. He got himself to achieve the "impossible" not merely by
physical practice but by constantly rehearsing16 the event in his mind, breaking through the four-

15
imposing imponierend, eindrucksvoll, imposant
impose auferlegen, aufbürden (on Dativ); Strafe verhängen (on gegen); etwas aufdrängen, -zwingen (on Dativ);
impose oneself on someone sich jemandem aufdrängen
16
rehearse MUSIK, THEATER proben
minute barrier so many times with so much emotional intensity that he created vivid references that
became an unquestioned command to his nervous system to produce the result. Many people don't
realize, though, that the greatest aspect of his breakthrough was what it did for others. It had seemed
no one would ever be able to break a four-minute mile, yet within one year of Roger's breaking the
barrier, 37 other runners also broke it. His experience provided them with references strong enough to
create a sense of certainty that they, too, could "do the impossible." And the year after that, 300 other
runners did the same thing!
"The belief that becomes truth for me ... is that which allows me the best use of my strength, the best
means of putting my virtues into action."
ANDRE GIDE
People so often develop limiting beliefs about who they are and what they're capable of. Because they
haven't succeeded in the past, they believe they won't be able to succeed in the future. As a result,
out of their fear of pain, they begin to constantly focus on being "realistic." Most people who constantly
say, "Let's be realistic," are really just living in fear, deathly afraid of being disappointed again. Out of
that fear, they develop beliefs that cause them to hesitate, to not give their all—consequently
they get limited results. Great leaders are rarely "realistic." They are intelligent, and they are accurate,
but they are not realistic by other people's standards. What is realistic for one person, though, is
totally different from what is realistic for another person, based upon their references. Gandhi believed
he could gain autonomy for India without violently opposing Great Britain—something that had never
been done before. He wasn't being realistic, but he certainly proved to be accurate. By the same token,
it certainly wasn't realistic for a man to believe he could give the world happiness by building a theme
park in the middle of an orange grove and charging people not only for the rides, but even to get in! At
the time, there was no such park in the world. Yet Walt Disney had a sense of certainty like few
people who have ever lived, and his optimism transformed his circumstances.
If you're going to make an error in life, err on the side of overestimating your capabilities (obviously,
as long as it doesn't jeopardize your life). By the way, this is something that's hard to do, since the
human capacity is so much greater than most of us would ever dream. In fact many studies have
focused on the differences between people who are depressed and people who are extremely
optimistic. After attempting to learn a new skill, the pessimists are always more accurate about how
they did, while the optimists see their behavior as being more effective than it actually was. Yet this
unrealistic evaluation of their own performance is the secret of their future success. Invariably17 the
optimists eventually18 end up mastering the skill while the pessimists fail. Why? Optimists are those,
who, despite having no references for success, or even references of failure, manage to ignore those
references, leaving unassembled such cognitive tabletops as "I failed" or "I can't succeed." Instead,
optimists produce faith references, summoning19 forth their imagination to picture themselves doing
something different next time and succeeding. It is this special ability, this unique focus, which allows
17
18
19

invariably ausnahmslos
eventually schließlich
summon auffordern; Versammlung einberufen; RECHT vorladen; summon up Mut zusammennehmen
them to persist until eventually they gain the distinctions that put them over the top. The reason
success eludes20 most people is that they have insufficient references of succeeding in the past. But an
optimist operates with beliefs such as, "The past doesn't equal the future." All great leaders, all
people who have achieved success in any area of life, know the power of continuously, pursuing their
vision, even if all the details of how to achieve it aren't yet; available. If you develop the absolute
sense of certainty that powerful beliefs provide, then you can get yourself to accomplish
virtually anything, including those things that other people are certain are impossible.
"Only in men's imagination does every truth find an effective and undeniable existence. Imagination,
not invention, is the supreme master of art, as of life."
JOSEPH CONRAD
One of the biggest challenges in anyone's life is knowing how to interpret "failures." How we deal with
life's "defeats" and what we determine is the cause will shape our destinies. We need to remember
that how we deal with adversity and challenges will shape our lives more than almost
anything else. Sometimes we get so many references of pain and failure that we begin to assemble
those into a belief that nothing we do can make things better. Some people begin to feel that things
are pointless, that they're helpless or worthless, or that no matter what they try they'll lose anyway.
These are a set of beliefs that must never be indulged in if we ever expect to succeed and achieve in
our lives. These beliefs strip us of our personal power and destroy our ability to act. In psychology,
there is a name for this destructive mindset: learned helplessness. When people experience enough
failure at something—and you'd be surprised how few times this is for some people—they perceive
their efforts as futile and develop the terminal discouragement of learned helplessness.
Dr. Martin Seligman of the University of Pennsylvania has done intensive research on what creates
learned helplessness. In his book Learned Optimism he reports on three specific patterns of beliefs
that cause us to feel helpless and can destroy virtually every aspect of our lives. He calls these three
categories permanence, pervasiveness, and personal. Many of our country's greatest achievers
have succeeded in spite of running into huge problems and barriers. The difference between them and
those who give up revolves around their beliefs about the permanence, or lack thereof, of their
problems. Achievers rarely, if ever, see a problem as permanent, while those who fail see even the
smallest problems as permanent. Once you adopt the belief that there's nothing you can do to change
something, simply because nothing you've done up until now has changed it, you start to take a
pernicious poison into your system. Eight years ago, when I had hit rock bottom and despaired of ever
turning things around, I thought my problems were permanent. That was the closest thing to
emotional death I've ever experienced. I learned to link so much pain to holding that belief that I was
able to destroy it, and I've never indulged in it again. You must do the same. If you ever hear yourself
or anyone you care about starting to express the belief that a problem is permanent, it's time to
immediately shake that person loose. No matter what happens in your life, you've got to be able to
believe, "This, too, shall pass," and that if you keep persisting, you'll find a way.
20

elude geschickt entgehen, ausweichen, sich entziehen (alle Dativ); übertragen nicht einfallen (Dativ)
The second difference between winners and losers, those who are optimistic and those who are
pessimistic, is their beliefs about the pervasiveness of problems. An achiever never sees a problem as
being pervasive, that is, that one problem controls their whole life. They always see it as, "Well, it's
just a little challenge with my eating pattern." They don't see it as, "I'm the problem. Because I
overeat, my whole life is destroyed." Conversely, those who are pessimistic—those who have learned
helplessness—have developed a belief that because they screwed up in one area, they are a screw-up!
They believe that because they have financial challenges, their whole life is now destroyed: their kids
won't be taken care of, their spouses will leave them, and so on. Pretty soon they generalize that
things are out of control and feel completely helpless. Imagine the impact of permanence and
pervasiveness together! The solution to both permanence and pervasiveness is to see something you
can take control of in your life, and begin to take action in that direction. As you do this, some of these
limiting beliefs will disappear. The final category of belief, which Seligman calls personal, I refer to as
the problem being personal. If we don't see a failure as a challenge to modify our approach, but rather
as a problem with ourselves, as a personality defect, we will immediately feel overwhelmed. After all,
how do you change your entire life? Isn't that more difficult than just changing your actions in a
particular area? Be wary of adopting the belief of the problem being personal. How inspired can you
get by beating yourself up?
Holding these limiting beliefs is equivalent to systematically ingesting minute doses of arsenic that,
over time, build up to a fatal dose. While we don't die immediately, we start dying emotionally the
moment we partake of them. So we have to avoid them at all costs. Remember, as long as you believe
something, your brain operates on automatic pilot, filtering any input from the environment and
searching for references to validate your belief, regardless of what it is.
"It is the mind that maketh good of ill, that maketh wretch or happy, rich or poor."
EDMUND SPENSER
HOW TO CHANGE A BELIEF
All personal breakthroughs begin with a change in beliefs. So how do we change? The most
effective way is to get your brain to associate massive pain to the old belief. You must feel deep in
your gut that not only has this belief cost you pain in the past, but it's costing you in the present and,
ultimately, can only bring you pain in the future. Then you must associate tremendous pleasure to the
idea of adopting a new, empowering belief. This is the basic pattern that we'll review again and again
in creating change in our lives. Remember, we can never forget that everything we do, we do either
out of our need to avoid pain or our desire to gain pleasure, and if we associate enough pain to
anything, we'll change. The only reason we have a belief about something is that we've linked
massive pain to not believing it or massive pleasure to keeping it alive.
Secondly, create doubt. If you're really honest with yourself, aren't there some beliefs that you used to
defend heart and soul years ago that you'd be almost embarrassed to admit to today? What happened?
Something caused you to doubt: maybe a new experience, maybe a counterexample to your past
belief. Perhaps you met some Russians and found out that they were people just like you, not part of
some "evil empire." I think that many Americans today feel a genuine compassion for Soviet citizens
because they see them as people who are struggling to take care of their families. Part of what
changed our perceptions was exchange programs in which we actually met Russians and saw how
much they share in common with us. We got new experiences which caused us to question,
interrupted our patterns of certainty, and began to shake our reference legs.
However, new experience in and of itself doesn't guarantee a change in belief. People can have an
experience that runs directly counter to their belief, yet reinterpret it any way they want in order to
bolster their conviction. Saddam Hussein demonstrated this during the Persian Gulf War, insisting that
he was winning despite the destruction that surrounded him. On a personal level, a woman at one of
my seminars started to experience some rather unique mental and emotional states, claiming that I
was a Nazi and was poisoning the people in the room with invisible gases flowing through the air
conditioning vents. As I tried to calm her down by slowing my speech patterns—a standard approach in
causing someone to relax—she pointed out, "See, it's already beginning to slur your speech!" No
matter what happened, she managed to use it to back up her conviction that we were all being
poisoned. Eventually I was able to break her pattern. How do you do that? We'll talk about that in the
next chapter. New experiences trigger change only if they cause us to question our beliefs.
Remember, whenever we believe something, we no longer question it in any way. The moment
we begin to honestly question our beliefs, we no longer feel absolutely certain about them. We are
beginning to shake the reference legs of our cognitive tables, and as a result start to lose our feeling of
absolute certainty. Have you ever doubted your ability to do something? How did you do it? You
probably asked yourself some poor questions like "What if I screw up?" "What if it doesn't work out?"
"What if they don't like me?" But questions can obviously be tremendously empowering if we use them
to examine the validity of beliefs we may have just blindly accepted. In fact, many of our beliefs are
supported by information we've received from others that we failed to question at the time. If we
scrutinize them, we may find that what we've unconsciously believed for years may be based on a
false set of presuppositions.
If you use a typewriter or computer, I'm sure you'll appreciate this example. Why do you think the
traditional arrangement of letters, numbers, and symbols on 99 percent of all typing devices is
universally accepted around the world? (By the way, that arrangement of characters is known as
QWERTY. If you type, you know that these are the characters on the top left row of your keyboard.)
Obviously this arrangement was devised as the most efficient configuration to bolster typing speed,
right? Most people never question it; after all, QWERTY has existed for 120 years. But in fact, QWERTY
is about the most inefficient configuration you can imagine! Many programs such as the Dvorak
Simplified Keyboard have been proven to cut errors and increase speed radically. The truth is, QWERTY
was deliberately designed to slow down the human typist at a time when typewriter pans moved so
slowly that they would jam if the operator typed too fast.
Why have we clung to the QWERTY keyboard for 120 years? In 1882, when almost everyone typed
with the hunt-and-peck method, a woman who had developed the eight-finger typing method was
challenged to a typing contest by another teacher. To represent her, she hired a professional typist, a
man who had memorized the QWERTY keyboard. With the advantage of memorization and the eightfinger method, he was able to beat his competitor, who used the four-finger hunt-and-peck method on
a different keyboard. So from then on, QWERTY became the standard for "speed," and no one even
questioned the reference anymore to see how valid it was. How many other beliefs do you have in
daily life about who you are, or what you can or cannot do, or how people should act, or what
capabilities your kids have that you're failing to question also—disempowering beliefs you've begun to
accept that limit your life, and you're not even aware of it?
If you question anything enough, eventually you'll begin to doubt it. This includes things that
you absolutely believe "beyond the shadow of a doubt." Years ago, I had the unique opportunity of
working with the U. S. Army, with whom I negotiated a contract to reduce certain training times for
specialized areas. My work was so successful that I also went through top-secret clearance and had a
chance to model one of the top officials in the CIA, a man who'd worked his way up from the bottom of
the organization. Let me tell you that the skills that he and others like him have developed for shaking
another person's convictions and changing their beliefs are absolutely astounding. They create an
environment that causes people to doubt what they've always believed, and then give them new ideas
and experiences to support the adoption of new beliefs. Watching the speed at which they can change
someone's belief is almost scary, yet it's powerfully fascinating. I've learned to use these techniques
on myself to be able to eliminate my disempowering beliefs and replace them with empowering ones.
Our beliefs have different levels of emotional certainty and intensity, and it's important to know just
how intense they really are. In fact, I've classified beliefs into three categories: opinions, beliefs, and
convictions. An opinion is something we feel relatively certain about, but the certainty is only
temporary because it can be changed easily. Our cognitive tabletop is supported by wobbly, unverified
reference legs that may be based on impressions. For example, many people originally perceived21
George Bush as a "wimp," based solely on his tone of voice. But when they saw how he was able to
galvanize support from leaders around the world and effectively deal with Saddam Hussein's invasion
of Kuwait, there was a clear shift in the public opinion polls. Bush soared to one of the highest levels of
public popularity of any president in modem history. But by the time you read this paragraph, this
cultural opinion may have changed. Such is the nature of opinions: they are easily swayed, and usually
based on only a few references that a person has focused on in the moment. A belief, on the other
hand, is formed when we begin to develop a much larger base of reference legs, and especially
reference legs about which we have strong emotion. These references give us an absolute sense of
certainty about something. And again, as I've said before, these references can come in a variety of
21

perceive (be)merken, wahrnehmen; erkennen
forms: anything from our personal experiences to information that we've taken in from other sources,
or even things we've imagined vividly.
People with beliefs have such a strong level of certainty that they are often closed off to new input. But
if you have rapport in communicating with them, it's possible to interrupt their pattern of closing off,
and get them to question their references so they begin to allow for new input. This creates enough
doubt to destabilize old references and make room for a new belief. A conviction, however, eclipses a
belief, primarily because of the emotional intensity a person links to an idea. A person holding a
conviction does not only feel certain, but gets angry if their conviction is even questioned. A person
with a conviction is unwilling to ever question their references, even for a moment; they are totally
resistant to new input, often to the point of obsession. For example, zealots22 through the ages have
held the conviction that their view of God is the only correct one, and they will even kill to maintain
those beliefs. The conviction of true believers has also been exploited by would-be saviors cloaking
their murderous intent under holy guises23; it's what caused that group of people living in Guyana to
poison their own children, and then themselves, by drinking cyanide-laced Kool-Aid at the direction of
the messianic madman Jim Jones.
Of course, fervent conviction is not the exclusive property of fanatics. It belongs to anyone with a high
enough degree of commitment and dedication to an idea, principle, or cause. For example, someone
who disagrees strongly with the practice of underground nuclear testing has a belief, but someone who
takes an action—even an action others do not appreciate or approve, such as demonstrating in a
protest march at the facility, has a conviction. Someone who bewails the state of public education has
a belief, but someone who actually volunteers in a literacy program to try to make a difference has a
conviction. Someone who fantasizes about owning an ice hockey team has an opinion about their
desire, but someone who does whatever it takes to gather the necessary resources to buy a franchise
has a conviction. What's the difference?
Clearly, it's in the actions that one is willing to take. In fact, someone with a conviction is so
passionate about their belief that they're even willing to risk rejection or make a fool of themselves for
the sake of their conviction.
Probably the single biggest factor separating belief and conviction, though, is that a conviction has
usually been triggered by significant emotional events, during which the brain links up, "Unless I
believe this, I will suffer massive pain. If I were to change this belief, then I would be giving up my
entire identity, everything my life has stood for, for years." Holding the conviction thus becomes
crucial to the person's very survival. This can be dangerous because anytime we're not willing to even
look at or consider the possibility that our beliefs are inaccurate, we trap ourselves in rigidity which

22
23

zealot Fanatiker(in), Eiferer, Eiferin
guise übertragen Gestalt, Maske
could ultimately condemn us to long-term failure. Sometimes it may be more appropriate to have a
belief about something rather than a conviction.
On the positive side, convictions—by the passion they inspire in us—can be empowering because they
compel us to act. According to Dr. Robert P. Abelson, professor of psychology and political science at
Yale University, "Beliefs are like possessions, and convictions are simply more valued possessions
which allow an individual to passionately work toward either large-scale or individual completion of
goals, projects, wishes, and desires."
Often the best thing you can do to create mastery in any area of your life is to raise a belief to the
level of conviction. Remember, conviction has the power to drive you to action, to push you through all
kinds of obstacles. Beliefs can do this as well, but some areas of your life may require the added
emotional intensity of conviction. For example, the conviction to never let yourself become overweight
will compel you to make consistently healthy lifestyle choices, allowing you to get more enjoyment out
of your life, and perhaps even saving you from a heart attack. The conviction that you are an
intelligent person who can always find a way to turn things around can help steer you through some of
the toughest times in your life.
So how can you create a conviction? 1) Start with the basic belief. 2) Reinforce your belief by adding
new and more powerful references. For example, let's say you've decided never to eat meat again. To
strengthen your resolve, talk to people who've chosen a vegetarian or vegan lifestyle: what reasons
prompted them to change their diet, and what have been the consequences on their health and in
other areas of their lives? In addition, begin to study the physiological impact that animal protein has.
The more references you develop, and the more emotional the references are, the stronger your
conviction will become. 3) Then find a triggering event, or else create one of your own. Associate
yourself fully by asking, "What will it cost me if I don't?" Ask questions that create emotional intensity
for you. For example, if you want to develop a conviction never to abuse drugs, make the painful
consequences of drug abuse feel real to you by viewing films or, better yet, visiting a shelter to see
firsthand the devastation wrought by drug abuse. If you've vowed to give up smoking, visit the
intensive-care wing of a hospital to observe emphysema patients confined to oxygen tents, or view an
X-ray of a smoker's black lungs. These kinds of experiences have the power to push you over the edge
and establish true conviction. 4) Finally, take action. Each action you take strengthens your
commitment and raises the level of your emotional intensity and conviction.
One of the challenges with convictions is that they're often based on other people's enthusiasm for
your beliefs. So often people believe something because everybody else believes it. This is known in
psychology as social proof. But social proof is not always accurate. When people are not sure what to
do, they look to others for guidance. In Dr. Robert Cialdini's book Influence, he describes a classic
experiment in which someone yells "Rape!" for a subject's benefit while two people (psychological
plants) ignore the cries for help and keep walking. The subject doesn't know whether to respond to the
pleas or not, but when he sees the other two people act as if nothing is wrong, he decides that the
cries for help are insignificant and to ignore them also.
Using social proof is a great way to limit your life—to make it just like everybody else's. Some of the
strongest social proof that people use is information that they get from "experts." But are experts
always right? Think about our healers throughout the years. It wasn't that long ago that the most upto-date doctors believed absolutely in the curative properties of leeches! And in our own generation,
doctors gave pregnant women a soothing-sounding medication for morning sickness—Bendectin, which
sounds like "benediction"—which turned out to be linked to birth defects. Of course, these doctors
were prescribing this drug because the drug companies—pharmaceutical experts—gave them certainty
that this was the finest drug available. What's the lesson? Trusting experts blindly is not well-advised.
Don't blindly accept everything I say, either! Consider things in the context of your own life; does it
make sense for you? Sometimes even the evidence of your senses can't be trusted, as the story of
Copernicus illustrates. In the days of this seminal Polish astronomer, everyone knew that the sun
moved around the earth. Why? Because anyone could walk outside, point to the sky and say, "See?
The sun has moved across the sky. Obviously the earth is the center of the universe." But in 1543
Copernicus developed the first accurate model of our sun-based solar system. He, like other giants
through the ages, had the courage to challenge the "wisdom" of the experts, and eventually the truth
of his theories gained acceptance in the general populace, although not during his lifetime.
PAIN IS THE ULTIMATE TOOL FOR
SHIFTING A BELIEF
Again, pain is still the most powerful way to change a belief. A great illustration of the power of
changed beliefs occurred on the Sally Jessy Raphael show when a brave woman stood before a studio
and world audience to renounce24 her alliance with the Ku Klux Klan. Ironically, she had been on the
same show only a month before, participating in a panel of KKK women railing against all who didn't
share their convictions

25

about race, angrily shouting that racial mixing—educationally, economically,

or socially—would be the downfall of the country and its people. What made her beliefs change so
drastically? Three things: First, a young woman in the audience during the original show had stood up,
crying, and pleaded for understanding. Her husband and child were Hispanic, and she sobbed that she
couldn't believe a group of people could be so hateful.
Second, flying home, she yelled at her son (who had appeared with her, yet didn't share her views) for
"embarrassing" her on national television. The rest of the women chastised him for being disrespectful,
and quoted to him from the Bible: "Thou shalt honor thy mother and father." Her sixteen-year-old son
responded by saying that God certainly didn't intend for him to respect the evil she was espousing, and
he immediately got off the plane in Dallas, vowing never to come home again. As the woman

24
25

renounce verzichten auf (Akkusativ); seinem Glauben und so weiter abschwören
conviction RECHT Verurteilung; Überzeugung
continued her flight home, her mind raced over the day's events, and also began to think about the
war that her country was fighting in the Middle East. She remembered what another member of the
audience had said to her that day: "Young men and women of color are over there fighting not only for
themselves, but also for you." She thought about her son, how much she loved him, and how spiteful
she had been with him. Would she allow that brief exchange of words to be their last? Even the
thought of it was too painful for her to bear. She had to make a change immediately.
As a result of this experience, she told the audience, she received a message from God which she
heeded immediately: to quit the Klan and to begin to love all people equally, as her brothers and
sisters. Certainly she will miss her friends—she'll be ostracized by the group—but she says that her
soul is now cleansed and that she will begin her life anew with a clear conscience. It's vital to examine
our beliefs, and their consequences, to make sure that they're empowering us. How do you know what
beliefs to adopt? The answer is to find someone who's producing the results you truly want in your life.
These people are the role models who can give you some of the answers you seek. Invariably, behind
all successful people lies a specific set of empowering beliefs.
The way to expand our lives is to model the lives of those people who are already
succeeding. It's powerful, it's fun, and these people are available all around you. It's just a matter of
asking questions: "What do you believe makes you different? What are the beliefs you have that
separate you from others?" Years ago I read a book called Meetings with Remarkabk Men, and used
that as a theme to shape my life. Since then I've become a hunter of excellence, constantly seeking
out the leading men and women in our culture to discover their beliefs, values, and strategies for
achieving success. Two years ago I developed POWERTALK™ my monthly audio magazine in which I
interview these giants. In fact, many of the key distinctions I'm sharing with you in this book were
made as a result of interviews with some of these people who are the finest in their particular areas of
endeavor. By having a commitment to share these interviews, my newest thoughts, and a summary of
a national best-selling book with you each month, I've developed a consistent plan not only for
empowering other people but for constantly improving myself as well. I'll be happy to help you in your
modeling of successful people through my program, but remember: you're not limited to me. The
models that you need are surrounding you every single day.*
"We are what we think.
All that we are arises
With our thoughts.
With our thoughts,
We make our world."
BUDDHA
For almost a decade now I've talked to people in my Living Health™ seminars about the direct
correlation between the high percentage of animal protein in the typical American diet and the high
incidence of this nation's top two killers: heart disease and cancer. By doing this, I contradicted one of
the belief systems that has most significantly shaped our physical destiny for the past thirty five years:
the "Four Basic Food Groups" plan that recommends generous daily servings of meat, chicken, or fish.
Yet today, scientists have now established beyond the shadow of a doubt a direct relationship between
eating animal protein and being at risk of developing heart disease and cancer. In fact, the 3,000member Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine has asked the Department of Agriculture to
drop meat, fish, poultry, eggs, and milk products from the recommended daily allowances. And the
government itself is considering changing the four basic food groups to six, relegating meat, chicken,
and fish to just a tiny proportion of the whole. This massive shift in beliefs has caused outrage in many
quarters. I believe this follows a pattern that we see throughout history and throughout our culture,
and that is simply this:
As the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer stated, all truth goes through three steps.
First, it is ridiculed.
Second, it is violently opposed.
Finally, it is accepted as self-evident26.
These ideas about animal protein used to be ridiculed; now they're being violently opposed.
Eventually they'll be accepted—but not until a lot more people become sick or even die because of
their limiting beliefs about how important excessive amounts of animal protein is for their bodies.
In business, too, we have a set of false beliefs that are leading us down a road of economic
frustration, and some say potential disaster. Our economy faces challenges in virtually every sector.
Why? I found one clue in an article I read in the March 1991 Forbes magazine. This article describes
two cars—the Chrysler-Plymouth Laser and the Mitsubishi Eclipse—and notes that Chrysler averaged
only thirteen sales per dealership of their car while Mitsubishi averaged over 100! You may say,
"What else is new? The Japanese are beating the pants off the American companies in selling cars."
But the unique thing about these two cars is that they're exactly the same—they were built in
partnership between these two companies. The only difference between the Laser and the Eclipse is
the name and the company who's selling it. How can this be? As you may have guessed, research
investigating the cause of the discrepancy in sales has shown that people want to buy Japanese cars
because they believe they are of greater quality. The problem in this case is that it's a false belief.
The American company's car is of the same quality because it's the very same car.
Why would consumers believe this? Obviously, it's because the Japanese have created a reputation
for quality, providing us with numerous references to back it up—even to the point where we no
longer question its validity. It may surprise you that the Japanese commitment to increasing quality
is actually the result of an American export in the person of Dr. W. Edwards Deming. In 1950 this
renowned quality-control expert was brought to Japan by General MacArthur, who was frustrated
26

self-evident selbstverständlich; offensichtlich
with a war-ravaged Japanese industrial base where he couldn't even count on being able to complete
a phone call. At the request of the Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers, Deming began to
train the Japanese in his total quality-control principles. When you hear this, do you immediately
think it refers to monitoring the quality of a physical product? Nothing could be further from the
truth. Deming taught the Japanese fourteen principles and a basic core belief that is the foundation
of virtually all decisions made in every successful, major, multinational Japanese corporation to this
day.
The core belief, simply, is this: a constant, never-ending commitment to consistently increase the
quality of their business every single day would give them the power to dominate the markets of the
world. Doming taught that quality was not just a matter of meeting a certain standard, but rather was
a living, breathing process of never-ending improvement. If the Japanese would live by the principles
that he taught, he promised them, within five years they would flood the world with quality products
and within a decade or two become one of the world's dominant economic powers.
Many thought Deming's proclamations were crazy. But the Japanese took him at his word, and today
he is revered as the father of the "Japanese miracle." In fact, each year since 1950, the highest honor
a Japanese company can receive is the National Deming Prize. This award is given on national
television and is used to acknowledge the company that represents the highest level of increases in
quality of products, service, management, and worker support throughout Japan.
In 1983 Ford Motor Company hired Dr. Deming to conduct a series of management seminars. One of
the attendees was Donald Petersen, who would later become chairman of Ford and put Deming's
principles into practice throughout the company. Petersen decided, "We need this man to turn our
company around." At the time. Ford was losing billions of dollars a year. Once Deming was brought in,
he changed their traditional Western belief from, "How can we increase our volume and cut our costs?"
to "How can we increase the quality of what we're doing, and do it in such a way that quality would not
cost more in the long term?" Ford reorganized its entire focus to make quality the top priority (as
reflected in their advertising slogan, "Quality is Job I"), and by implementing Deming's systems. Ford
within three years moved from a staggering deficit to the dominant industry position with a $6 billion
profit!
How did they do it? They found that Americans' perception of Japanese quality, while frustrating, had
much to teach them. For example, Ford contracted with a Japanese company to make half the
transmissions for one of their cars in order to keep the volume up. In the process, they found that
American consumers were demanding the Japanese transmission. In fact, they were willing to put their
names on a waiting list, and even pay more money for them! This upset many of the executive staff at
Ford, whose first reaction was, "Well, it's merely a false belief on the part of people in our culture;
they're conditioned to respond this way." But under Deming's supervision the transmissions were
tested, and they found that in fact the Ford transmission was much louder, broke down much more
often, and was returned more often than the Japanese transmission, which had virtually no trouble, no
vibration, and no sound. Deming taught the members of the Ford team that quality always costs less.
This was directly the opposite of what most people believed: that you could only achieve certain levels
of quality before costs got out of hand. When the experts took the Ford transmissions apart and
measured all the parts, they found that all of them met the standards set forth in the Ford manual, the
same standards that had been sent to the Japanese. But when they measured the Japanese
transmissions, they found virtually no measurable differences among any of them! In fact, the
transmissions had to be brought into a laboratory and measured under a microscope in order to detect
differences.
Why did this Japanese company hold themselves to a higher standard of quality than even their
contract required? They believed that quality costs less, that if they created a quality product they
would not just have satisfied customers but loyal customers—customers who would be willing to wait
in line and pay more money for their product. They were operating from the same core belief that
propelled them to one of the top market positions in the world: a commitment to never-ending
improvement and a constant increase in the quality of life for their customers. This belief was an
American export—one I believe we need to repatriate in order to change the direction of our
economic future.
One toxic belief that may be destroying our economic strength as a nation is what Deming calls
managing by the visible numbers, the conventional corporate belief that profits are made by cutting
costs and increasing revenues. A notable example occurred when Lynn Townsend took charge of
Chrysler during an industry-wide sales slump. Townsend immediately tried to increase revenues, but
more importantly, he cut costs. How? He fired two-thirds of the engineering staff. In the short term, it
looked like he'd made the right decision. Profitability shot up, and he was dubbed a hero. But within a
few years Chrysler was again in financial straits. What happened? Well, there certainly wasn't any one
factor. But in the long term, the decisions Townsend made may have been destroying the basis of
quality upon which the company's success depended. Often the very people who are injuring our
companies are rewarded because they produce results in the short term. Sometimes we treat the
symptoms of a problem while we nurture the cause. We've got to be careful how we interpret results.
By contrast, one of the most important factors in turning Ford Motor Company around was their design
staff, who came up with a new car called the Taurus. The quality of that car set a new standard for
Ford, and consumers bought it in droves.
What can we learn from all this? The beliefs that we hold in business and in life control all of our
decisions, and therefore our future. One of the most important global beliefs that you and I can adopt
is a belief that in order to succeed and be happy, we've got to be constantly improving the quality of
our lives, constantly growing and expanding.
In Japan, they understand this principle well. In fact, in Japanese businesses, as a result of Deming's
influence, there is a word that is used constantly in discussions about business or relationships. That
word is kaizen. This word literally means constant improvement, and the word is constantly used in
their language. They often speak of the kaizen of their trade deficit, the kaizen of the production line,
the kaizen of their personal relationships. As a result, they're constantly looking at how to improve. By
the way, kaizen is based upon the principle of gradual improvement, simple improvements. But the
Japanese understand that tiny refinements made daily begin to create compounded enhancements at a
level that most people would never dream of. The Japanese have a saying: "If a man has not been
seen for three days, his friends should take a good look at him, and see what changes have befallen
him." Amazingly, but not surprisingly, we have no equivalent word for kaizen in English.
The more I began to see the impact of kaizen in the Japanese business culture, I realized that it was
an organizing principle that made a tremendous impact in my own life. My own commitment to
constantly improve, to constantly raise my own standards for a quality life is what's kept me both
happy and successful. I realized that we all need a word to anchor ourselves to the, focus of Constant
and Never-ending Improvement. When we create a word, we encode meaning and create a way of
thinking. The words that we use consistently make up the fabric of how we think and even affect our
decision making.
As a result of this understanding, I created a simple mnemonic: CANI! (pronounced kuhn-EYE), which
stands for Constant And Never-ending Improvement. I believe that the level of success we experience
in life is in direct proportion to the level of our commitment to CANI!, to constant and never-ending
improvement. CANI! is not a principle related merely to business, but to every aspect of our lives. In
Japan, they often talk of company-wide quality control. I believe we have to focus on CANI! in our
business, CANI! in our personal relationships, CANI! in our spiritual connection, CANI! in our health,
and CANI! in our finances. How can we make constant and never-ending improvement in each of these
areas? This makes life an incredible adventure in which we're always looking forward to the next level.
CANI! is a true discipline. It can't just be practiced every once in a while, when you feel like it. It must
be a constant commitment backed up by action. The essence of CANI! is gradual, even minute,
continuous improvement that over the long term sculpts a masterpiece of colossal proportions. If
you've ever visited the Grand Canyon, you know what I'm talking about. You've witnessed the aweinspiring beauty produced by millions of years of gradual change as the Colorado River and numerous
tributaries have continually chiseled the rock to create one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World.
Most people never feel secure because they are always worried that they will either lose their job, lose
the money they already have, lose their spouse, lose their health, and so on. The only true security
in life comes from knowing that every single day you are improving yourself in some way,
that you are increasing the caliber of who you are and that you are valuable to your company, your
friends, and your family. I don't worry about maintaining the quality of my life, because every
day I work on improving it. I constantly strive to learn and to make new and more powerful
distinctions about ways to add value to other people's lives. This gives me a sense of certainty that I
can always learn, that I can always expand, that I can always grow. CANI! doesn't mean you never
experience challenges. In fact, you can only improve something if you realize that it's not quite right,
that it's not yet at the level it should be. The purpose of CANI! is to discover problems in the making
and handle them before they become crises. After all, the best time to kill a "monster" is while it's still
little. As an integral part of my personal commitment to CANI!, at the end of each day I ask myself
these questions: What have I learned today? What did I contribute or improve? What did I enjoy? If
every day you constantly improve your ability to enjoy your life, then you'll experience it at a level of
richness most people never even dream of.
SMALL IMPROVEMENTS ARE
BELIEVABLE AND THEREFORE
ACHIEVABLE!
Pat Riley, formerly of the Los Angeles Lakers organization, is the winningest coach in NBA history.
Some say he was fortunate because he had such incredible players. It's true that he had incredible
players, but many people have had the resources to succeed and have not done so consistently. Pat's
ability to do this has been based on his commitment to CANI! In fact, he said that at the beginning of
the 1986 season he had a major challenge on his hands. Many of the players had given what they
thought was their best season in the previous year but still had lost to the Boston Celtics. In search of
a believable plan to get the players to move to the next level, he decided upon the theme of small
improvements. He convinced the players that increasing the quality of their game by a mere 1 percent
over their personal best would make a major difference in their season. This seems ridiculously small,
but when you think about twelve players increasing by 1 percent their court skills in five areas, the
combined effort creates a team that's 60 percent more effective than it was before. A 10 percent
overall difference would probably be enough to win another championship. The real value of this
philosophy, however, is that everyone believed that it was achievable. Everyone felt certain that they
could improve at least 1 percent over their personal bests in the five major areas of the game, and
that sense of certainty in pursuit of their goals caused them to tap even greater potentials. The result?
Most of them increased by at least 5 percent, and many of them by as much as 50 percent. According
to Pat Riley, 1987 turned out to be their easiest season ever. CANI! works if you commit to it.
Remember, the key to success is developing a sense of certainty—the kind of belief that allows you to
expand as a person and take the necessary action to make your life and the lives of those around you
even greater. You may believe something is true today, but you and I need to remember that as the
years go by and we grow, we'll be exposed to new experiences. And we may develop even more
empowering beliefs, abandoning things we once felt certain about. Realize that your beliefs may
change as you gather additional references. What really matters now is whether the beliefs you have
today empower or disempower you. Begin today to develop the habit of focusing on the consequences
of all your beliefs. Are they strengthening your foundation by moving you to action in the direction you
desire, or are they holding you back?
"As he thinketh in his heart, so is he."
—PROVERBS 23:7
We've discovered so much about beliefs, but in order to truly take control of our lives, we've got to
know what beliefs we're already using to guide us. So right now, stop everything else you're doing and
take the next ten minutes to have some fun. Begin to brainstorm all the beliefs you have, both
those that empower you and disempower you: little beliefs that don't seem to matter at all and
global beliefs that seem to make a big difference. Make sure you cover;
• If-then beliefs like, "If I consistently give my all, then I will succeed," or "If I'm totally passionate
with this person, then they'll leave me
• Global beliefs, like beliefs about people—"People are basically good" or "People are a pain"—beliefs
about yourself, beliefs about opportunity, beliefs about time, beliefs about scarcity and abundance. Jot
down as many of these as you can imagine for the next ten minutes. Please give yourself the gift of
doing this right now. When you're done, I'll show you how you can strengthen your empowering beliefs
and eliminate the disempowering ones. Do it right now.

EMPOWERING BELIEFS:
DISEMPOWERING BELIEFS:

Did you take enough time to make sure you wrote out both lists, both the empowering beliefs and
disempowering beliefs? If not, go back and do it now!
What have you learned by doing this? Take a moment now to review your beliefs. Decide upon and
circle the three most empowering beliefs on your list. How do they empower you? How do they
strengthenyour life? Think about the positive processional effects they have upon you. Years ago, I
made a list like this, and I found it invaluable because I discovered that I had a belief that was
underemployed. It was the belief "There's always a way to turn things around if I'm
committed." When I read my list, I thought, "This is a belief that needs to be strengthened and
turned into a conviction." I'm so glad I did because only about a year later that conviction was a life
preserver that pulled me through one of the toughest times, a time when everything around me
seemed to be sinking. Not only did it buoy my spirit, but it also helped me deal with one of the most
difficult personal and business challenges I had yet faced. This one belief, this sense of certainty,
enabled me to find ways to turn things around when everybody around me said it couldn't be done. I
not only turned things around, I turned my biggest challenges into my biggest opportunities—and so
can you! Review this list and strengthen your emotional intensity and sense of certainty that these
beliefs are true and real so they can guide your future behaviors.
Now let's take a look at your limiting beliefs. As you review them, what are some of the consequences
that these beliefs carry with them? Circle the two most disempowering beliefs. Decide right now,
once and for all, that you're no longer willing to pay the price that these beliefs are charging your life.
Remember that if you begin to doubt the beliefs and question their validity, you can shake their
reference legs so they no longer impact you. Knock those legs of certainty out from under your
disempowering beliefs by asking yourself some of the following questions:
1. How is this belief ridiculous or absurd?
2. Was the person I learned this belief from worth modeling in this area?
3. What will it ultimately cost me emotionally if I don't let go of this belief?
4. What will it ultimately cost me in my relationships if I don't let go of this belief?
5. What will it ultimately cost me physically if I don't let go of this belief?
6. What will it ultimately cost me financially if I don't let go of this belief?
7. What will it cost my family/loved ones if I don't let go of this belief?
If you've taken the time to really answer these questions, you may find that your beliefs have been
significantly weakened under the scrutiny of these questions. Now become fully associated to what
these beliefs have been costing you and the real costs in your future if you do not change. Link such
intense pain that you'll want to rid yourself of them forever, and then, finally, decide to do so now.
Finally, we can't get rid of a pattern without replacing it with a new one. So right now, write down
the replacements for the two limiting beliefs you've just eliminated. What is their antithesis?
For example, if you had a belief that "I can never succeed because I'm a woman," your new belief
might be, "Because I'm a woman, I have resources available to me that no man could ever dream of!"
What are some of the references you have to back up this idea so you begin to feel certain about it? As
you reinforce and strengthen this belief, it will begin to direct your behavior in an entirely new and
more empowering way.
If you're not getting the results you want in your life, I suggest you ask yourself, "What would I have
to believe in order to succeed here?" Or "Who is already succeeding in this area, and what do they
believe differently than I do about what's possible?" Or "What's necessary to believe in order to
succeed?" You may very well discover the key belief that's been eluding you. If you're experiencing
pain, if you feel challenged or frustrated or angry, you may want to ask yourself, "What would I have
to believe in order to feel the way I do?" The miracle of this simple process is that it will uncover
beliefs you aren't even aware you have. For example, if you're feeling depressed and ask yourself,
"What would I have to believe in order to feel depressed?" you'll probably come up with something
that relates to the future, like, "Things will never get better," or "There's no hope." When you hear
these beliefs verbalized, you might well think, "I don't believe that! I feel bad right now, but I know it's
not going to be bad forever. This, too, shall pass." Or you may just decide that a belief about having
problems permanently is totally destructive and one you're not willing to ever consider again.
While you're examining these limiting beliefs, notice how your feelings change. Realize, believe, and
trust that if you change the meaning of any event in your mind, you will immediately change how you
feel and what you do, which will lead you to change your actions and thus transform your destiny.
Changing what something means will change the decisions you make. Remember, nothing in life has
any meaning except the meaning you give it. So make sure that you consciously choose the
meanings that are most in alignment with the destiny you've chosen for yourself.
Beliefs have the awesome potential to create or destroy. I believe you picked up this book because
deep down you've decided you will not settle for less than the best you know you're capable of. Do you
truly want to harness the power to create the vision you want rather than destroy your dreams? Then
learn to choose the beliefs that empower you; create convictions that drive you in the direction of the
destiny that calls to the highest within you. Your family, your business, your community, and your
country deserve no less.

LEADERSHIP AND THE POWER OF BELIEF
Leaders are those individuals who live by empowering beliefs and teach others to tap their full
capabilities by shifting the beliefs that have been limiting them. One great leader who impresses me is
a teacher by the name of Marva Collins. You may have seen the 60 Minutes program or the movie that
was made about her. Thirty years ago, Marva utilized her personal power and decided to touch the
future by making a real difference in the lives of children. Her challenge: when she got to her first
teaching job in what many considered to be a ghetto of Chicago, her second-grade students had
already decided that they didn't want to learn anything. Yet Marva's mission is to touch these
children's lives. She doesn't have a mere belief that she can impact them; she has a passionate, deeprooted conviction that she will influence them for good. There was no limit to the extent she would go.
Faced with children labelled as dyslexics and every other kind of learning or behavioural disorder, she
decided that the problem was not the children, but the way they were being taught. No one was
challenging them enough. As a result, these kids had no belief in themselves. They had no references
of ever being pushed to break through and find out who they really were or what they were capable of.
Human beings respond to challenge, and these children, she believed, needed that more than
anything else. So she threw out all the old books that read, "See Spot run," and instead taught
Shakespeare, Sophocles, and Tolstoy. All the other teachers said things like, "There's no way it can
happen. There's no way these kids can understand that." And as you might guess, many of them attacked Marva personally, saying that she was going to destroy these children's lives. But Marva's
students not only understood the material, they thrived on it. Why? Because she believed so fervently
27

in the uniqueness of each child's spirit, and his or her ability to learn anything. She communicated

with so much congruency and love that she literally got them to believe in themselves—some of them
for the first time in their young lives. The results she has consistently produced for decades have
been extraordinary.
I first met Marva and interviewed her at Westside Preparatory School, the private school she founded
outside the Chicago city school system. After our meeting, I decided to interview some of her students.
The first young man I met was four years old, with a smile that would knock your socks off. I shook his
hand.
"Hi, I'm Tony Robbins."
"Hello, Mr. Robbins, my name is Talmadge E. Griffin. I am four years old. What would you like to
know?!"
"Well, Talmadge, tell me, what are you studying these days?"
"I'm studying a lot of things, Mr. Robbins."
"Well, what books have you read recently?"
"I just finished reading Of Mice and Men, by John Steinbeck."
Needless to say, I was pretty impressed. I asked him what the book was about, figuring he'd say
something like it was about two guys named George and Lenny.
He said, "Well, the main protagonist is ..."
By this time I was a believer! Then I asked him what he had learned from the book.
"Mr. Robbins, I more than learned from this book. This book permeated28 my soul."
I started to laugh, and asked, "What does 'permeate' mean?"
"To diffuse through," he said, then gave me a fuller definition than I could give you.
"What touched you so much in this book, Talmadge?"
"Mr. Robbins, I noticed in the story that the children never judge anyone else by the colour of their
skin. Only the adults did that. What I learned from this is that although I will someday become an
adult, I'll never forget the lessons of a child." I started to get teary-eyed because I saw that Marva
Collins was providing this young man and so many others like him with the kinds of powerful beliefs
that will continue to shape his decisions not only today, but throughout his life. Marva increases her
students' quality of life by using the three organizing principles I talked about in the beginning of
this book: she gets them to hold themselves to a higher standard, she assists them in adopting new,
empowering beliefs that enable them to break through their old limitations, and she backs all this up
with specific skills and strategies necessary for lifelong success. The results? Her students become not
only confident, but competent. The immediate results in terms of their academic excellence are
striking, and the processional effects generated in their everyday lives are profound. Finally I asked
Talmadge, "What's the most important thing that Mrs. Collins has taught you?"
"The most important thing Mrs. Collins has taught me is that SOCIETY MAY PREDICT, BUT ONLY I WILL
DETERMINE MY DESTINY!"

27
28

fervent glühend, leidenschaftlich
permeate durchdringen; dringen (into in Akkusativ; through durch)
Maybe we all need to remember the lessons of a child. With the beliefs young Talmadge expressed so
beautifully, I guarantee that he, as well as the other children in the class, will have a great opportunity
to continuously interpret their lives in a way that will create the future they desire, rather than the one
that most people fear. Let's review what we've learned so far. We're clear that there's a power inside
us that needs to be awakened. That power starts with the capability to make conscious decisions that
shape our destiny. But there is one core belief that we must explore and resolve, and this belief can be
found in your answer to the question . . .
5
CAN CHANGE HAPPEN IN AN INSTANT?
"Behold, I show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye ..."
CORINTHIANS 15:51
For as long as I can remember, I've always dreamed of having the ability to help people change
virtually anything in their lives. Instinctively, at an early age, I realized that to be able to help others
change, I had to be able to change myself. Even in junior high school, I began to pursue knowledge
through books and tapes that I thought could teach me the fundamentals of how to shift human
behaviour and emotion. Of course I wanted to improve certain aspects of my own life: get myself
motivated, get myself to follow through and take action, learn how to enjoy life, and leam how to
connect and bond with people. I'm not sure why, but somehow I linked pleasure to learning and
sharing things that could make a difference in the quality of people's lives and lead them to appreciate
and maybe even love me. As a result, by the time I was in high school, I was known as the "Solutions
Man." If you had a problem, I was the guy to see, and I took great pride in this identity. The more I
learned, the more addicted I became to learning even more. Understanding how to influence human
emotion and behaviour became an obsession for me. I took a speed-reading class and developed a
voracious appetite for books. I read close to 700 books in just a few years, almost all of them in the
areas of human development, psychology, influence, and physiological development. I wanted to
know anything and everything there was to know about how we can increase the quality of our lives,
and tried to immediately apply it to myself as well as share it with other people. But I didn't stop with
books. I became a fanatic for motivational tapes and, while still in high school, saved my money to go
to different types of personal development seminars. As you can imagine, it didn't take long for me to
feel like I was hearing nothing but the same messages reworked over and over again. There appeared
to be nothing new, and I became a bit jaded. Just after my twenty-first birthday, though, I was
exposed to a series of technologies that could make changes in people's lives with lightning-like speed:
simple technologies like Gestalt therapy, and tools of influence like Ericksonian hypnosis and NeuroLinguistic Programming. When I saw that these tools could really help people create changes in
minutes that previously took months, years, or decades to achieve, I became an evangelist in my
approach to them. I decided to commit all of my resources to mastering these technologies. And I
didn't stop there: as soon as I learned something, I applied it immediately. I'll never forget my first
week of training in Neuro-Linguistic Programming. We learned things like how to eliminate a lifetime
phobia in less than an hour—something that through many forms of traditional therapy could take as
much as five years or more! On the fifth day, I turned to the psychologists and psychiatrists in the
class and said, "Hey, guys, let's find some phobics and cure them!" They all looked at me like I was
crazy. They made it very clear to me that I obviously wasn't an educated man, that we had to wait
until the six-month certification program was completed, go through a testing procedure, and if we
were successful, only then would we be ready to use this material! I wasn't willing to wait. So I
launched my career by appearing on radio and television programs throughout Canada and eventually
the United States as well. In each of these, I talked to people about these technologies for creating
change and made it clear that if we wanted to change our lives, whether it was a disempowering habit
or a phobia that had been controlling us for years, that behaviour or that emotional pattern
could be changed in a matter of minutes, even though they might have tried to change it for years
previously. Was this a radical concept? You bet. But I passionately argued that all changes are created
in a moment. It's just that most of us wait until certain things happen before we finally decide to make
a shift. If we truly understood how the brain worked, I argued, we could stop the endless process of
analyzing why things had happened to us, and if we could just simply change what we linked pain and
pleasure to, we could just as easily change the way our nervous systems had been conditioned and
take charge of our lives immediately. As you can imagine, a young kid with no Ph.D. who was making
these controversial claims on the radio didn't go over very well with some traditionally trained mentalhealth professionals. A few psychiatrists and psychologists attacked me, some on the air.
So I learned to build my career in changing people on two principles:
technology and challenge. I knew I had a superior technology, a superior way of creating change
based on crucial understandings of human behaviour that most traditional psychologists were not
trained in. And I believed that if I challenged myself and the people I worked with enough, I could find
a way to turn virtually anything around. One particular psychiatrist called me a charlatan and a liar and
charged that I was making false claims. I challenged this psychiatrist to suspend his pessimism and
give me an opportunity to work with one of his patients, someone he hadn't been able to change after
working with her for years. It was a bold move, and at first he did not comply with my request. But
after utilizing a little leverage (a technique I'll cover in the next chapter), I finally got the psychiatrist
to let a patient come on her own to one of my free guest events and allow me, in front of the room, to
work with her. In fifteen minutes I wiped out the woman's phobia of snakes—at the time she'd been
treated for over seven years by the psychiatrist who attacked me. To say the least, he was amazed.
But more importantly, can you imagine the references this created for me and the sense of certainty it
gave me about what I could accomplish? I became a wild man! I stormed across the country
demonstrating to people how quickly change could occur. I found that no matter where I went, people
were initially sceptical. But, as I was able to demonstrate measurable results before their eyes, I was
able to get not only their attention and interest but also their willingness to apply what I'd talked about
to produce measurable results in their own lives.
Why is it that most people think change takes so long? One reason, obviously, is that most people
have tried again and again through willpower to make changes, and failed. The assumption that they
then make is that important changes must take a long time and be very difficult to make. In reality,
it's only difficult because most of us don't know how to change! We don't have an effective strategy.
Willpower by itself is not enough—not if we want to achieve lasting change.
The second reason we don't change quickly is that in our culture, we have a set of beliefs that prevents
us from being able to utilize our own inherent abilities. Culturally, we link negative associations to the
idea of instant change. For most, instant change means you never really had a problem at all. If you
can change that easily, why didn't you change a week ago, a month ago, a year ago, and stop
complaining?
For example, how quickly could a person recover from the loss of a loved one and begin to feel
differently? Physically, they have the capability to do it the next morning. But they don't. Why?
Because we have a set of beliefs in our culture that we need to grieve for a certain period of time. How
long do we have to grieve? It all depends upon your own conditioning. Think about this. If the next day
after you lost a loved one, you didn't grieve, wouldn't that cause a great deal of pain in your life? First,
people would immediately believe you didn't care about the loved one you lost. And, based on cultural
conditioning, you might begin to believe that you didn't care, either. The concept of overcoming death
this easily is just too painful. We choose the pain of grieving rather than changing our emotions until
we're satisfied that our rules and cultural standards about what's appropriate have been met. There
are, in fact, cultures where people celebrate when someone dies! Why? They believe that God always
knows the right time for us to leave the earth, and that death is graduation. They also believe that if
you were to grieve about someone's death, you would be indicating nothing but your own lack of
understanding of life, and you would be demonstrating your own selfishness. Since this person has
gone on to a better place, you're feeling sorry for no one but yourself. They link pleasure to death, and
pain to grieving, so grief is not a part of their culture. I'm not saying that grief is bad or wrong. I'm
just saying that we need to realize it's based upon our beliefs that pain takes a long time to recover
from. As I spoke from coast to coast, I kept encouraging people to make life-changing shifts, often in
thirty minutes or less. There was no doubt I created controversy, and the more successes I had, the
more assured and intense I became as well. To tell the truth, I was occasionally confrontational and
more than a little cocky. I started out doing private therapy, helping people turn things around, and
then began to do seminars. Within a few short years, I was travelling on the road three weeks out of
four, constantly pushing myself and giving my all as I worked to extend my ability to positively impact
the largest number of people I could in the shortest period of time. The results I produced became
somewhat legendary. Eventually the psychiatrists and psychologists stopped attacking and actually
became interested in learning my techniques for use with their own patients. At the same time, my
attitudes changed and I became more balanced. But I never lost my passion for wanting to help as
many people as I could. One day about four and a half years ago, not long after Unlimited Power was
first published, I was signing books after giving one of my business seminars in San Francisco. All the
while I was reflecting on the incredible rewards that had come from following through on the
commitments I had made to myself while still in high school: the commitments to grow, expand,
contribute, and thereby make a difference. I realized as each smiling face came forward how deeply
grateful I was to have developed skills that can make a difference in helping people to change virtually
anything in their lives.
As the last group of people finally began to disperse, one man approached me and asked, "Do you
recognize me?" Having seen literally thousands of people in that month alone, I had to admit that I
didn't. He said, "Think about it for a second." After looking at him for a few moments, suddenly it
clicked. I said, "New York City, right?" He said, "That's true." I said, "I did some private work with you
in helping you to wipe out your smoking habit." He nodded again. I said, "Wow, that was years ago!
How are you doing?" He reached in his pocket, pulled out a package of Marlboros, pointed at me with
an accusing look on his face and said, "You failed!" Then he launched into a tirade about my inability
to "program" him effectively. I have to admit I was rattled! After all, I had built my career on my
absolute willingness to put myself on the line, on my total commitment to challenging myself and other
people, on my dedication to trying anything in order to create lasting and effective change with
lightning-like speed. As this man continued to berate my ineffectiveness in "curing" his smoking habit,
I wondered what could have gone wrong. Could it be that my ego had outgrown my true level of
capability and skill? Gradually I began to ask myself better questions: What could I learn from this
situation? What was really going on here? "What happened after we worked together?" I asked him,
expecting to hear that he had resumed smoking a week or so after the therapy. It turned out that he'd
stopped smoking for two and a half years, after I'd worked with him for less than an hour! But one day
he took a puff, and now he was back to his four-pack-a-day habit, plainly blaming me because the
change had not endured. Then it hit me: this man was not being completely unreasonable. After all, I
had been teaching something called Neuro-Linguistic Programming. Think about the word
"programming." It suggests that you could come to me, I would program you, and then everything
would be fine. You wouldn't have to do anything! Out of my desire to help people at the deepest level,
I'd made the very mistake that I saw other leaders in the personal development industry make: I had
begun to take responsibility for other people's changes.
That day, I realized I had inadvertently placed the responsibility with the wrong person—me—and that
this man, or any one of the other thousands of people I'd worked with, could easily go back to their old
behaviours if they ran into a difficult enough challenge because they saw me as the person responsible
for their change. If things didn't work out, they could just conveniently blame somebody else. They
had no personal responsibility, and therefore, no pain if they didn't follow through on the new behavior.
As a result of this new perspective, I decided to change the metaphor for what I do. I stopped using
the word "programming" because while I continue to use many NLP techniques, I believe it's
inaccurate. A better metaphor for long-term change is conditioning. This was solidified for me when, a
few days later, my wife brought in a piano tuner for our new baby grand. This man was a true
craftsman. He worked on every string in that piano for literally hours and hours, stretching each one to
just the right level of tension to create the perfect vibration. At the end of the day, the piano played
magnificently. When I asked him how much I owed, he said, "Don't worry, I'll drop off a bill on my
next visit." My response was, "Next visit? What do you mean?" He said, "I'll be back tomorrow, and
then I'll come back once a week for the next month. Then I'll return every three months for the rest of
the year, only because you live by the ocean." I said, "What are you talking about? Didn't you already
make all the adjustments on the piano? Isn't it set up properly?" He said, "Yes, but these strings are
strong; to keep them at the perfect level of tension, we've got to condition them to stay at this level.
I've got to come back and re-tighten them on a regular basis until the wire is trained to stay at this
level." I thought, "What a business this guy has!" But I also got a great lesson that day. This is exactly
what we have to do if we're going to succeed in creating long-term change. Once we effect a change,
we should reinforce it immediately. Then, we have to condition our nervous systems to succeed not
just once, but consistently. You wouldn't go to an aerobics class just one time and say, "Okay, now
I've got a great body and I'll be healthy for life!" The same is true of your emotions and behaviour.
We've got to condition ourselves for success, for love, for breaking through our fears. And through that
conditioning, we can develop patterns that automatically lead us to consistent, lifelong success.
We need to remember that pain and pleasure shape all our behaviours, and that pain and pleasure can
change our behaviours. Conditioning requires that we understand how to use pain and pleasure. What
you're going to learn in the next chapter is the science that I've developed to create any change you
want in your life. I call it the Science of Neuro-Associative Conditioning™, or NAC. What is it? NAC is a
step-by-step process that can condition your nervous system to associate pleasure to those things you
want to continuously move toward and pain to those things you need to avoid in order to succeed
consistently in your life without constant effort or willpower. Remember, it's the feelings that we've
been conditioned to associate in our nervous systems—our neuro-associations—that determine our
emotions and our behaviour.
When we take control of our neuro-associations, we take control of our lives. This chapter will show
you how to condition your neuro-associations so that you are empowered to take action and produce
the results you've always dreamed of. It's designed to give you the kNACk of creating consistent and
lasting change.
"Things do not change; we change."
HENRY DAVID THOREAU
What are the two changes everyone wants in life? Isn't it true that we all want to change either 1) how
we feel about things or 2) our behaviours? If a person has been through a tragedy—they were abused
as a child, they were raped, lost a loved one, are lacking in self-esteem—this person clearly will remain
in pain until the sensations they link to themselves, these events, or situations are changed. Likewise,
if a person overeats, drinks, smokes, or takes drugs, they have a set of behaviours that must change.
The only way this can happen is by linking pain to the old behaviour and pleasure to a new behaviour.
This sounds so simple, but what I've found is that in order for us to be able to create true change—
change that lasts—we need to develop a specific system for utilizing any techniques you and I learn to
create change, and there are many. Every day I'm picking up new skills and new technologies from a
variety of sciences. I continue to use many of the NLP and Ericksonian techniques that I began my
career with; some of them are the finest available. Yet I always come back to utilizing them within the
framework of the same six fundamental steps that the science of NAC represents. I created NAC as a
way to use any technology for change. What NAC really provides is a specific syntax—an order and
sequence—of ways to use any set of skills to create long-term change.
I'm sure you recall that in the first chapter I said that one of the key components of creating long-term
change is a shift in beliefs. The first belief we must have if we're going to create change quickly is that
we can change now. Again, most people in our society have unconsciously linked a lot of pain to the
idea of being able to change quickly. On one hand, we desire to change quickly, and on the other, our
cultural programming teaches us that to change quickly means that maybe we never even had a
problem at all. Maybe we were just faking it or being lazy. We must adopt the belief that we can
change in a moment. After all, if you can create a problem in a moment, you should be able to create
a solution, too! You and I both know that when people finally do change, they do it in a moment, don't
they? There's an instant when the change occurs. Why not make that instant now? Usually it's the
getting ready to change that takes people time. We've all heard the joke:
Q: How many psychiatrists does it take to change a light bulb?
A: just one ... but it's very expensive, it takes a long time, and the light bulb has to want to change.
Garbage! You and I have to get ourselves ready to change. You and I have to become our own
counsellors and master our own lives. The second belief that you and I must have if we're going to
create long-term change is that we're responsible for our own change, not anyone else. In fact, there
are three specific beliefs about responsibility that a person must have if they're going to create longterm change:
1) First, we must believe, "Something must change"—not that it should change, not that it could or
ought to, but that it absolutely must. So often I hear people say, "This weight should come off,"
"Procrastinating is a lousy habit," "My relationships should be better." But you know, we can "should"
all over ourselves, and our life still won't change! It's only when something becomes a must that we
begin the process of truly doing what's necessary to shift the quality of our lives.
2) Second, we must not only believe that things must change, but we must believe, "I must change
it." We must see ourselves as the source of the change. Otherwise, we'll always be looking for
someone else to make the changes for us, and we'll always have someone else to blame when it
doesn't work out. We must be the source of our change if our change is going to last.
3) Third, we have to believe, "I can change it." Without believing that it's possible for us to change, as
we've already discussed in the last chapter, we stand no chance of carrying through on our desires.
Without these three core beliefs, I can assure you that any change you make stands a good chance of
being only temporary. Please don't misunderstand me—it's always smart to get a great coach (an
expert, a therapist, a counsellor, someone who's already produced these results for many other people)
to support you in taking the proper steps to conquer your phobia or quit smoking or lose weight. But in
the end, you have to be the source of your change.
The interaction I had with the relapsed smoker that day triggered me to ask new questions of myself
about the sources of change. Why was I so effective throughout the years? What had set me apart
from others who'd tried to help these same people who had equal intention but were unable to produce
the result? And when I'd tried to create a change in someone and failed, what had happened then?
What had prevented me from producing the change that I was really committed to helping this
person make? Then I began to ask larger questions, like "What really makes change happen in any
form of therapy?" All therapies work some of the time, and all forms of therapy fail to work at other
times. I also began to notice two other interesting things: some people went to therapists I didn't think
were particularly skilled, and still managed to make their desired change in a very short period of time
in spite of the therapist. I also saw other people who went to therapists I considered excellent, yet
were not helped to produce the results they wanted in the short term. After a few years of witnessing
thousands of transformations and looking for the common denominator, finally it hit me: we can
analyze our problems for years, but nothing changes until we change the sensations we link to an
experience in our nervous system, and we have the capacity to do this quickly and powerfully if we
understand . . .

THE POWER OF YOUR BRAIN
What a magnificent gift we were born with! I've learned that our brains can help us accomplish
virtually anything we desire. The brain's capacity is nearly unfathomable29. Most of us know little about
how it works, so let's briefly focus upon this unparalleled30 vessel of power and how we can condition it
to consistently produce the results we want in our lives. Realize that your brain eagerly31 awaits your
every command, ready to carry out anything you ask of it. All it requires is a small amount of fuel: the
oxygen in your blood and a little glucose. In terms of its intricacy and power, the brain defies even our
greatest modem computer technology. It is capable of processing up to 30 billion bits of information
per second and it boasts the equivalent of 6,000 miles of wiring and cabling. Typically the human
nervous system contains about 28 billion neurons (nerve cells designed to conduct impulses). Without
neurons, our nervous systems would be unable to interpret the information we receive through our
sense organs, unable to convey it to the brain and unable to carry out instructions from the brain as to
what to do. Each of these neurons is a tiny, self-contained computer capable of processing about
one million bits of information. These neurons act independently, but they also communicate with
other neurons through an amazing network of 100,000 miles of nerve fibres. The power of your brain
to process information is staggering32, especially when you consider that a computer—even the fastest
computer—can make connections only one at a time. By contrast, a reaction in one neuron can spread
to hundreds of thousands of others in a span of less than 20 milliseconds. To give you perspective,
that's about ten times less than it takes for your eye to blink. A neuron takes a million times longer to
send a signal than a typical computer switch, yet the brain can recognize a familiar face in less than a
second—a feat beyond the ability of the most powerful computers. The brain achieves this speed
because, unlike the step-by-step computer, its billions of neurons can all attack a problem
simultaneously. So with all this immense power at our disposal, why can't we get ourselves to feel
happy consistently? Why can't we change a behaviour like smoking or drinking, overeating or
procrastinating? Why can't we immediately shake off depression, break through our frustration, and
feel joyous every day of our lives? We can! Each of us has at our disposal the most incredible
computer on the planet, but unfortunately no one gave us an owner's manual. Most of us have no idea
how our brains really work, so we attempt to think our way into a change when, in reality, our
behaviour is rooted in our nervous systems in the form of physical connections—neural connections—
or what I call neuro-associations.
29
30
31

fathom SCHIFFFAHRT Faden; loten; ergründen
unparalleled einmalig, beispiellos
eager begierig; eifrig
NEURO-SCIENCE: YOUR TICKET TO LASTING CHANGE
Great breakthroughs in our ability to understand the human mind are now available because of a
marriage between two widely different fields: neuro-biology (the study of how the brain works) and
computer science. The integration of these sciences has created the discipline of neuroscience. Neuro-scientists study how neuro-associations occur and have discovered that neurons are
constantly sending electro-chemical messages back and forth across neural pathways, not unlike traffic
on a busy thoroughfare. This communication is happening all at once, each idea or memory moving
along its own path while literally billions of other impulses are travelling in individual directions. This
arrangement enables us to hopscotch mentally from memories of the pine smell of an evergreen
forest after a rain, to the haunting melody of a favourite Broadway musical, to painstakingly detailed
plans of an evening with a loved one, to the exquisite size and texture of a newborn baby's thumb.
Not only does this complex system allow us to enjoy the beauty of our world, it also helps us to
survive in it. Each time we experience a significant amount of pain or pleasure, our brains search for
the cause and record it in our nervous systems to enable us to make better decisions about what to do
in the future. For example, without a neuro-association in your brain to remind you that sticking your
hand into an open flame would bum you, you could conceivably make this mistake again and again
until your hand is severely burned. Thus, neuro-associations quickly provide our brains with the signals
that help us to re-access our memories and safely manoeuvre us through our lives.
"To the dull mind all nature is leaden. To the illumined mind the whole world burns and sparkles with
light."
RALPH WALDO EMERSON
When we do something for the first time, we create a physical connection, a thin neural strand that
allows us to re-access that emotion or behaviour again in the future. Think of it this way; each time we
repeat the behaviour, the connection strengthens. We add another strand to our neural connection.
With enough repetitions and emotional intensity, we can add many strands33 simultaneously,
increasing the tensile strength of this emotional or behavioural pattern until eventually we have a
"trunk line" to this behaviour or feeling. This is when we find ourselves compelled to feel these feelings
or behave in this way consistently. In other words, this connection becomes what I've already labelled
a neural "super-highway" that will take us down an automatic and consistent route of behaviour.
This neuro-association is a biological reality—it's physical. Again, this is why thinking our way into a
change is usually ineffective; our neuro-associations are a survival tool and they are secured in our
nervous systems as physical connections rather than as intangible "memories." Michael Merzenich of
the University of California, San Francisco, has scientifically proven that the more we indulge in any
32
stagger (sch)wanken, taumeln, torkeln; jemanden sprachlos machen, umwerfen; Arbeitszeit und so weiter
staffeln; (Sch)Wanken, Taumeln
33
strand Strang; Faden; (Kabel)Draht; (Haar)Strähne; !! nicht Strand
pattern of behaviour, the stronger that pattern becomes. Merzenich mapped the specific areas in a
monkey's brain that were activated when a certain finger in the monkey's hand was touched. He then
trained one monkey to use this finger predominantly34 in order to earn its food. When Merzenich
remapped the touch-activated areas in the monkey's brain, he found that the area responding to the
signals from that finger's additional use had expanded in size nearly 600 percent! Now the monkey
continued the behaviour even when he was no longer rewarded because the neural pathway was so
strongly established. An illustration of this in human behaviour might be that of a person who no
longer enjoys smoking but still feels a compulsion to do so. Why would this be the case? This person is
physically "wired" to smoke. This explains why you may have found it difficult to create a change in
your emotional patterns or behaviours in the past. You didn't merely "have a habit"—you had created a
network of strong neuro-associations within your nervous system.
We unconsciously develop these neuro-associations by allowing our- selves to indulge35 in emotions or
behaviours on a consistent basis. Each time you indulge in the emotion of anger or the behaviour of
yelling at a loved one, you reinforce the neural connection and increase the likelihood that you'll do it
again. The good news is this: research has also shown that when the monkey was forced to stop using
this finger, the area of the brain where these neural connections were made actually began to shrink in
size, and therefore the neuro-association weakened. This is good news for those who want to change
their habits! If you'll just stop indulging in a particular behaviour or emotion long enough, if you just
interrupt your pattern of using the old pathway for a long enough period of time, the neural connection
will weaken and atrophy. Thus the disempowering emotional pattern or behaviour disappears with it.
We should remember this also means that if you don't use your passion it's going to dwindle36.
Remember: courage, unused, diminishes37. Commitment, unexercised, wanes38. Love, unshared,
dissipates39.
"It is not enough to have a good mind; the main thing is to use it well."
RENE DESCARTES

What the science of Neuro-Associative Conditioning offers is six steps that are specifically designed to
change behavior by breaking patterns that disempower you. But first, we must understand how the
brain makes a neuro-association in the first place. Any time you experience significant amounts of pain
or pleasure, your brain immediately searches for the cause. It uses the following three criteria.
1. Your brain looks for something that appears to be unique. To narrow down the likely causes, the
brain tries to distinguish something that is unusual to the circumstance. It seems logical that if you're
having unusual feelings, there must be an unusual cause.
34

predominant (vor)herrschend, überwiegend
indulge nachsichtig sein gegen; einer Neigung und so weiter nachgeben; indulge in something sich etwas
gönnen oder leisten
36
dwindle (dahin)schwinden, abnehmen
37
diminish (sich) vermindern oder verringern
38
wane 1. abnehmen (Mond); schwinden (Einfluss, Macht und so weiter); 2. be on the wane im Schwinden
begriffen sein
39
dissipate (sich) zerstreuen; verschwenden
35
2. Your brain looks for something that seems to be happening simultaneously. This is known in
psychology circles as the Law of Recency. Doesn't it make sense that what occurs in the moment (or
close proximity to it) of intense pleasure or pain is probably the cause of that sensation?
3. Your brain looks for consistency. If you're feeling pain or pleasure, your brain begins to immediately
notice what around you is unique and is happening simultaneously. If the element that meets these
two criteria also seems to occur consistently whenever you feel this pain or pleasure, then you can be
sure that your brain will determine that it is the cause. The challenge in this, of course, is that when
we feel enough pain or pleasure, we tend to generalize about consistency. I'm sure you've had
someone say to you, "You always do that," after you've done something for the first time. Perhaps
you've even said it yourself.
Because the three criteria for forming neuro-associations are so imprecise, it is very easy to fall prey
to misinterpretations and create what I call false neuro-associations. That's why we must evaluate
linkages before they become a part of our unconscious decision-making process. So often we blame
the wrong cause, and thereby close ourselves off from possible solutions. I once knew a woman, a
very successful artist, who hadn't had a relationship with a man for twelve years. Now, this woman
was extremely passionate about everything she did; it's what made her such a great artist. However,
when her relationship ended and she found herself in massive pain, her brain immediately searched for
the cause—it searched for something that was unique to this relationship.
Her brain noted that the relationship had been especially passionate. Instead of identifying it as one of
the beautiful parts of the relationship, she began to think that this was the reason that the relationship
ended. Her brain also looked for something that was simultaneous to the pain; again it noted that
there had been a great deal of passion right before it had ended. When she looked for something that
was consistent, again passion was pinpointed as the culprit. Because passion met all three criteria, her
brain decided that it must be the reason the relationship ended painfully.
Having linked this as the cause, she resolved never to feel that level of passion in a relationship again.
This is a classic example of a false neuro-association. She had linked up a fake cause, and this was
now guiding her current behaviours and crippling the potential for a better relationship in the future.
The real culprit in her relationship was that she and her partner had different values and rules. But
because she linked pain to her passion, she avoided it at all costs, not only in relationships, but even in
her art. The quality of her entire life began to suffer. This is a perfect example of the strange ways in
which we sometimes wire ourselves; you and I must understand how our brain makes associations and
question many of those connections that we've just accepted that may be limiting our lives. Otherwise,
in our personal and professional lives, we are destined to feel unfulfilled and frustrated.

A SOURCE OF SELF-SABOTAGE
Even more insidious40 are mixed neuro-associations, the classic source of self-sabotage. If you've ever
found yourself starting to accomplish something, and then destroying it, mixed neuro-associations are
40

insidious heimtückisch
usually the culprit. Perhaps your business has been moving in fits and starts, flourishing41 one day and
floundering42 the next. What is this all about? It's a case of associating both pain and pleasure to the
same situation. One example a lot of us can relate to is money. In our culture, people have incredibly
mixed associations to wealth. There's no doubt that people want money. They think it would provide
them with more freedom, more security, a chance to contribute, a chance to travel, to learn, to
expand, to make a difference. But simultaneously, most people never climb above a certain earnings
plateau because deep down they associate having "excess" money to a lot of negatives. They associate
it to greed, to being judged, to stress, with immorality or a lack of spirituality.
One of the first exercises I ask people to do in my Financial Destiny™ seminars is to brainstorm all the
positive associations they have to wealth, as well as all the negative ones. On the plus side they write
down such things as: freedom, luxury, contribution, happiness, security, travel, opportunity, and
making a difference. But on the minus side (which is usually more full) they write down such things as:
fights with spouse, stress, guilt, sleepless nights, intense effort, greed, shallowness, and complacency,
being judged, and taxes. Do you notice a difference in intensity between the two sets of neuroassociations? Which do you think plays a stronger role in their lives?
When you're deciding what to do, if your brain doesn't have a clear signal of what equals pain and
what equals pleasure, it goes into overload and becomes confused. As a result, you lose momentum
and the power to take the decisive actions that could give you what you want. When you give your
brain mixed messages, you're going to get mixed results. Think of your brain's decision-making
process as being like a scale: "If I were to do this, would it mean pain or pleasure?" And remember,
it's not just the number of factors on each side but the weight they individually carry. It's possible that
you could have more pleasurable than painful associations about money, but if just one of the negative
associations is very intense, then that false neuro-association can wipe out your ability to succeed
financially.
What happens when you get to a point where you feel that you're going to have pain no matter what
you do? I call this the pain-pain barrier. Often, when this occurs, we become immobilized—we don't
know what to do. Usually we choose what we believe will be the least painful alternative. Some people,
however, allow this pain to overwhelm them completely and they experience learned helplessness.
Using the six steps of NAC will help you to interrupt these disempowering patterns. You will create
alternative pathways so that you're not just "wishing" away an undesired behaviour, or overriding it in
the short term, but are actually rewiring yourself to feel and behave consistent with your new,
empowering choices. Without changing what you link pain and pleasure to in your nervous system, no
change will last. After you read and understand the following six steps, I challenge you to choose
something that you want to change in your life right now. Take action and follow through with each of
the steps you're about to learn so that you not only read the chapter, but you produce changes as the
result of reading it. Let's begin to learn . . .

41
42

flourish 1. Schnörkel; MUSIK Tusch; 2. blühen, gedeihen; schwenken
flounder ZOOLOGIE Flunder; zappeln; strampeln; sich verhaspeln
6
HOW TO CHANGE ANYTHING IN YOUR LIFE:
THE SCIENCE
OF NEURO-ASSOCIATIVE CONDITIONING™

"The beginning of a habit is like an invisible thread43, but every time we repeat the act we strengthen
the strand, add to it another filament, until it becomes a great cable and binds us irrevocably44,
thought and act."
—ORISON SWETT MARDEN
If you and I want to change our behaviour, there is only one effective way to do it: we must link
unbearable and immediate sensations of pain to our old behaviour, and incredible and immediate
sensations of pleasure to a new one. Think about it this way: all of us, through the experience of life,
have learned certain patterns of thinking and behaving to get ourselves out of pain and into pleasure.
We all experience emotions like boredom or frustration or anger or feeling overwhelmed, and develop
strategies for ending these feelings. Some people use shopping; some use food; some use sex; some
use drugs; some use alcohol; some use yelling at their kids. They know, consciously or unconsciously,
that this neural pathway will relieve their pain and take them to some level of pleasure in the moment.
Whatever the strategy, if you and I are going to change it, we have to go through six simple steps, the
outcome of which is to find a more direct and empowering way to get out of pain and into pleasure,
ways that will be more effective and elegant. These six steps of NAC will show you how to create a
direct highway out of pain and into pleasure with no disempowering detours. They are:

NAC MASTER STEP 1
Decide What You Really Want and What's Preventing You From Having It Now.
You'd be surprised how many people came to me for private therapeutic work, and when I asked them
what they wanted, they'd spend twenty minutes telling me what they didn't want, or what they no
longer wanted to experience. We've got to remember that we get whatever we focus on in life. If we
keep focusing on what we don't want, we'll have more of it. The first step to creating any change
is deciding what you do want so that you have something to move toward. The more specific

43
thread 1. Faden (auch übertragen); Garn; TECHNIK Gewinde; 2. Nadel einfädeln; Perlen und so weiter
auffädeln, -reihen
44
irrevocable unwiderruflich, unabänderlich, endgültig
you can be about what you want, the more clarity you will have, and the more power you will
command to achieve what you want more rapidly.
We also must learn what's preventing us from having what we want. Invariably, what's
preventing us from making the change is that we link more pain to making a change than to staying
where we are. We either have a belief like, "If I change, I will have pain," or we fear the unknown that
change might bring.

NAC MASTER STEP 2
Get Leverage: Associate Massive Pain to Not Changing Now and Massive Pleasure to the
Experience of Changing Now!
Most people know that they really want to change, yet they just can't get themselves to do it! But
change is usually not a question of capability; it's almost always a question of motivation. If
someone put a gun to our heads and said, "You'd better get out of that depressed state and start
feeling happy now," I bet any one of us could find a way to change our emotional state for the moment
under these circumstances.
But the problem, as I've said, is that change is often a should and not a must. Or it's a must,
but it's a must for "someday." The only way we're going to make a change now is if we create a
sense of urgency that's so intense that we're compelled to follow through. If we want to
create change, then, we have to realize that it's not a question of whether we can do it, but rather
whether we will do it. Whether we will or not comes down to our level of motivation, which in turn
comes down to those twin powers that shape our lives, pain and pleasure.
Every change you've accomplished in your life is the result of changing your neuroassociations
about what means pain and what means pleasure. So often, though, we have a hard time getting
ourselves to change because we have mixed emotions about changing.
On the one hand, we want to change. We don't want to get cancer from smoking. We don't
want to lose our personal relationships because our temper is out of control. We don't want our kids to
feel unloved because we're harsh with them. We don't want to feel depressed for the rest of our lives
because of something that happened in our past. We don't want to feel like victims anymore.
On the other hand, we fear change. We wonder, "What if I stop smoking cigarettes, but I die of
cancer anyway and I've given up the pleasure that cigarettes used to give me?" Or "What if I let go of
this negative feeling about the rape, and it happens to me again?" We have mixed emotions where
we link both pain and pleasure to changing, which causes our brain to be uncertain as to what to do,
and keeps us from utilizing our full resources to make the kinds of changes that can happen literally in
a moment if every ounce of our being were committed to them.
How do we turn this around? One of the things that turns virtually anyone around is reaching a
pain threshold. This means experiencing pain at such an intense level that you know you must
change now—a point at which your brain says, "I've had it; I can't spend another day, not another
moment, living or feeling this way." Have you ever experienced this in a personal relationship, for
example? You hung in there, it was painful and you really weren't happy, but you stayed in it anyway.
Why? You rationalized that it would get better, without doing anything to make it better. If you were in
so much pain, why didn't you leave? Even though you were unhappy, your fear of the unknown was a
more powerful motivating force. "Yeah, I'm unhappy now," you may have thought, "but what if I leave
this person and then I never find anyone? At least I know how to deal with the pain I have now."
This kind of thinking is what keeps people from making changes. Finally, though, one day the
pain of being in that negative relationship became greater than your fear of the unknown, so you hit a
threshold and made the change. Maybe you've done the same thing with your body, when you finally
decided you couldn't spend another day without doing something about your excess weight. Maybe the
experience that finally pushed you over the edge was your failure to be able to squeeze into your
favourite pair of jeans, or the sensations of your "thunder thighs" rubbing against each other as you
waddled up a set of stairs! Or just the sight of the bulbous folds of excess flesh hanging from the side
of your body!

THE ALPO DIET
Recently, a woman attending a seminar told me about her fail-safe strategy that she had developed for
shredding unwanted pounds. She and a friend had committed over and over again to losing weight,
but failed to keep their promise each and every time. Finally, they both reached the point where losing
weight was a must. Based on what I taught them, they needed some leverage to push themselves
over the edge. They needed to make not keeping their promise more painful than anything they could
imagine. They decided to commit to each other and a group of friends that if they welshed on their
promise this time, they would each have to eat a whole can of Alpo dog food! So, to stave off any hint
of a craving, these two enterprising women told everyone and kept their cans in plain view at all times
as a constant reminder. She told me that when they started to feel hunger pangs, they'd pick up the
can and read the label. With ingredients boasting "horsemeat chunks," they found no difficulty in
sticking to their commitment. They achieved their goal without a hitch!

A lever is a device that we utilize in order to lift or move a tremendous burden we could not otherwise
manage. Leverage is absolutely crucial in creating any change, in freeing yourself from behavioural
burdens like smoking, drinking, overeating, cursing, or emotional patterns like feeling depressed,
worried, fearful, or inadequate—you name it. Change requires more than just establishing the
knowledge that you should change. It's knowing at the deepest emotional and most basic sensory level
that you must change. If you've tried many times to make a change and you've failed to do so, this
simply means that the level of pain for failing to change is not intense enough. You have not reached
threshold, the ultimate leverage.
When I was doing private therapy, it was imperative that I find the point of greatest leverage
in order to help people make changes in one session that years of therapy had failed to accomplish. I
started every session by saying that I couldn't work with anyone who wasn't committed to changing
now. One of the reasons was that I charged $3,000 for a session, and I didn't want them to invest
their money unless they were absolutely going to get the result they were committed to today, in this
one session. Many times these people had flown in from some other part of the country. The thought
of my sending them home without handling their problem motivated my clients to spend at least half
an hour convincing me that they were indeed committed and would do anything to change now. With
this kind of leverage, creating change became a matter of course. To paraphrase the philosopher
Nietzsche, he who has a strong enough why can bear almost any how. I've found that 20 percent of
any change is knowing how; but 80 percent is knowing why. If we gather a set of strong enough
reasons to change, we can change in a minute something we've failed to change for years.
"Give me a lever long enough. And a prop strong enough. I can single-handedly move the world." —
ARCHIMEDES
The greatest leverage you can create for yourself is the pain that comes from inside, not
outside. Knowing that you have failed to live up to your own standards for your life is the ultimate pain.
If we fail to act in accordance with our own view of ourselves, if our behaviours are inconsistent with
our standards—with the identity we hold for ourselves—then the chasm between our actions and who
we are drives us to make a change.
The leverage created by pointing out an inconsistency between someone's standards and their
behaviour can be incredibly effective in causing them to change. It's not just pressure placed on them
by the outside world, but pressure built up by themselves from within. One of the strongest forces in
the human personality is the drive to preserve the integrity of our own identity.
The reason so many of us seem to be walking contradictions is simply that we never recognize
inconsistencies for what they are. If you want to help somebody, you won't access this kind of
leverage by making them wrong or pointing out that they're inconsistent, but rather by asking them
questions that cause them to realize for themselves their inconsistencies. This is a much more
powerful lever than attacking someone. If you try to exert only external pressure, they'll push against
it, but internal pressure is next to impossible to resist.
This kind of pressure is a valuable tool to use on yourself. Complacency breeds stagnation; unless
you're extremely dissatisfied with your current pattern of behavior, you won't be motivated to make
the changes that are necessary. Let's face it; the human animal responds to pressure. So why would
someone not change when they feel and know that they should? They associate more pain to making
the change than to not changing. To change someone, including ourselves, we must simply reverse
this so that not changing is incredibly painful (painful beyond our threshold of tolerance), and the idea
of changing is attractive and pleasurable!
To get true leverage, ask yourself pain-inducing questions: "What will this cost me if I don't change?"
Most of us are too busy estimating the price of change. But what's the price of not changing?
"Ultimately what will I miss out on in my life if I don't make the shift? What is it already costing me
mentally, emotionally, physically, financially, spiritually?" Make the pain of not changing feel so real to
you, so intense, so immediate that you can't put off taking that action any longer. If that doesn't
create enough leverage, then focus on how it affects your loved ones, your children, and other people
you care about. Many of us will do more for others than we'll do for ourselves. So picture in graphic
detail how much your failure to change will negatively impact the people who are most important to
you.
The second step is to use pleasure-associating questions to help you link those positive sensations to
the idea of changing. "If I do change, how will that make me feel about myself? What kind of
momentum could I create if I change this in my life? What other things could I accomplish if I really
made this change today? How will my family and friends feel? How much happier will I be now?" The
key is to get lots of reasons, or better yet, strong enough reasons, why the change should take place
immediately, not someday in the future. If you are not driven to make the change now, then you don't
really have leverage.
Now that you've linked pain in your nervous system to not changing, and pleasure to making the
change, you're driven to create a change, you can proceed to the third master step of NAC. . . .

NAC

MASTER STEP 3

Interrupt the Limiting Pattern.
In order for us to consistently feel a certain way, we develop characteristic patterns of thinking,
focusing on the same images and ideas, asking ourselves the same questions. The challenge is that
most people want a new result, but continue to act in the same way. I once heard it said that the
definition of insanity is "doing the same things over and over again and expecting a different result."
Please don't misunderstand me. There's nothing wrong with you; you don't need to be "fixed." (And I
suggest you avoid anyone who uses these metaphors to describe you!) The resources you need to
change anything in your life are within you right now. It's just that you have a set of neuroassociations that habitually cause you to not fully utilize your capability. What you must do is
reorganize your neural pathways so that they consistently guide you in the direction of your desires
rather than your frustrations and fears.
To get new results in our lives, we can't just know what we want and get leverage on ourselves. We
can be highly motivated to change, but if we keep doing the same things, running the same
inappropriate patterns, our lives are not going to change, and all we'll experience is more and more
pain and frustration.
Have you ever seen a fly that's trapped in a room? It immediately searches for the light, so it heads
for the window, smacking itself against the glass again and again, sometimes for hours. Have you ever
noticed people do this? They're highly motivated to change: they have intense leverage. But all the
motivation in the world won't help if you try to get outside through a closed window. You've got to
change your approach. The fly stands a chance only if it backs off and looks around for another exit.
If you and I run the same old pattern, we're going to get the same old results. Record albums create
the same sounds consistently because of their pattern, the continuous groove in which the sound is
encoded. But what would happen if one day I picked up your record, took a needle, and scratched
across it back and forth dozens of times? If I do this enough, there's a point when the pattern is so
deeply interrupted that the record will never play the same way again. Likewise, just interrupting
someone's limiting pattern of behavior or emotion can completely change their life because sometimes
it also creates leverage, and with these two steps alone, you can change virtually anything. The
additional steps of NAC are just a way to make sure the changes last and that you develop new
choices that are enjoyable and empowering.
I created a fun pattern interrupt recently at one of my three-day Unlimited Power™ seminars in
Chicago. One man claimed that he really wanted to kick his chocolate habit, yet it was clear to me that
he received a great deal of pleasure from his identity as a "chocolate addict." In fact, he was even
wearing a T-shirt that proclaimed "I want the world, but I'll settle for chocolate." This provided strong
evidence that this man, although he may have desired to stop eating chocolate, also had a great deal
of "secondary gain" to maintain this habit. Sometimes people want to create a change because a
behavior or emotional pattern creates pain for them. But they may also derive benefit from the very
thing they're trying to change. If a person becomes injured, for example, and then suddenly everyone
waits on them hand and foot, giving them a great deal of attention, they may find that their injuries
don't heal quite as quickly. While they want to be over the pain, unconsciously they want more of the
pleasure of knowing that people care. You can do everything right, but if secondary gain is too strong,
you will find yourself going back to the old ways. Someone with secondary gain has mixed emotions
about changing. They say they want to change, but often they subconsciously believe that maintaining
the old behavior or emotional pattern gives them something they couldn't get any other way. Thus
they're not willing to give up feeling depressed, even though it's painful. Why? Because being
depressed gets them attention, for example. They don't want to feel depressed, but they desperately
want attention. In the end, the need for attention wins out, and they stay depressed. The need for
attention is only one form of secondary gain. In order to resolve this, we have to give the person
enough leverage that they must change, but also we must show them a new way to get their needs
met.
While on some level, I'm sure this man knew he needed to kick chocolate, I'm also fairly certain that
he knew he could use this opportunity to get some serious attention. Any time there is secondary gain
involved, you have to step up the leverage, so I decided that a massive pattern interrupt would create
the necessary leverage. "Sir!" I exclaimed. "You're telling me that you're ready to give up chocolate.
That's great. There's just one thing L want you to do before we eliminate that old pattern forever." He
asked, "What's that?" I said, "To get your body in the right condition, for the next nine days you must
eat nothing but chocolate. Only chocolate can pass your lips." People in the audience started giggling45,
and the man looked at me uncertainly. "Can I drink anything?" he asked. "Yes," I said, "you can
drink water. Four glasses a day—but that's all. Everything else must be chocolate." He shrugged his
shoulders and grinned. "Okay, Tony, if that's what you want. I can do this without changing. I hate to
make a fool out of you!" I smiled and continued with the seminar. You should have seen what
happened next! As if by magic, dozens of chocolate bars and candies materialized out of people's
45

giggle 1. kichern; 2. Gekicher
pockets, purses and briefcases and were passed down to him. By the lunch break, he had been
inundated with every last morsel of chocolate in that auditorium: Baby Ruths, Butterfingers, Snickers,
Milky Ways, M & M's, Almond Joys, Fanny Farmer fudge. He caught my eye in the lobby outside.
"Thanks, Tony; this is great!" he exclaimed as he unwrapped and popped Hershey's Kisses into his
mouth, determined to show that he could "beat me." But he failed to realize that he wasn't competing
with me—he was competing with himself! I was merely enlisting his body as an ally in getting leverage
and breaking his pattern.
Do you know how thirsty sugar makes you? By the end of the day this guy's throat was absolutely
raw—and he had definitely lost his passion for chocolate as people continued to shovel Krackel bars
into his pockets and press his palms with Thin Mints. By the second day he'd definitely lost his sense of
humor, but he wasn't yet ready to cry uncle. "Have some more chocolate!" I insisted. He unwrapped a
Three Musketeers bar and glared at me.
By the third morning, as he trailed into the auditorium, he looked like a man who had spent all night
praying to the porcelain goddess. "How was breakfast?" I asked as people laughed. "Not so good," he
admitted weakly. "Have some more!" I said. Feebly he accepted another piece of chocolate from
someone sitting behind him, but he failed to open it or even look at it. "What's the matter?" I asked
him. "Fed up?" He nodded. "Come on, you're the chocolate champion!" I goaded. "Have some more!
Isn't chocolate the greatest? How about some Mounds bars? And some Peanut M & M's? And a whole
box of Rocky Road fudge? Can't you just taste it? Doesn't it make your mouth water?"
The longer I talked, the greener he got. "Have some more!" I said, and finally he exploded: "YOU
CANT MAKE ME!" The audience laughed uproariously46 as the man realized what he'd said. "All right,
then. Throw the candy away and sit down."
Later, I came back to him, and assisted him in selecting empowering alternatives to the chocolate,
laying down some new pathways to pleasure that were more empowering and didn't require him to
consume something he knew wasn't good for him. Then I really got to work with him, conditioning the
new associations and helping him replace his old addiction with a smorgasbord of healthful behaviors:
power breathing, exercise, water-rich foods, proper food combining, and so on. Had I created leverage
on this guy? You bet! If you can give someone pain in their body, that's undeniable leverage. They'll do
anything to get out of pain and into pleasure. Simultaneously, I broke his pattern. Everybody else was
trying to get him to stop eating chocolate. I demanded that he eat it! That was something he never
expected, and it massively interrupted his pattern. He rapidly linked such painful sensations to the idea
of eating chocolate that a new neural pathway was laid down overnight, and his old "Hershey Highway"
was bombed beyond recognition. When I used to conduct private therapies, people would come to see
me, sit down in my office and begin to tell me what their problem was. They'd say, "My problem is ..."
and then they'd burst into tears, out of control. As soon as this happened, I would stand up and shout,
"EXCUSE ME!" This would jolt them, and then I'd follow up with, "We haven't started yet!" Usually they
responded, "Oh, I'm so sorry." And they'd immediately change their emotional states and regain
control. It was hysterical to watch! These people who felt they had no control over their lives would
immediately prove that they already knew exactly how to change how they felt!
46

uproarious schallend (Gelächter)
One of the best ways to interrupt someone's pattern is to do things they don't expect, things that are
radically different from what they've experienced before. Think of some of the ways you can interrupt
your own patterns. Take a moment to think up some of the most enjoyable and disruptive ways you
can interrupt a pattern of being frustrated, worried, or overwhelmed.
Next time you start to feel depressed, jump up, look at the sky, and yell in your most idiotic tone of
voice, "H-A-L-L-E-L-U-J-A-H! My feet don't stink today!" A stupid, silly move like that will definitely
shift your attention, change your state, and it will definitely change the states of everyone around you
as they begin to realize that you're no longer depressed—just crazy!
If you overeat on a regular basis and want to stop, I'll give you a technique that will definitely work, if
you're willing to commit to it. The next time you find yourself in a restaurant overeating, jump up in
the middle of the room, point at your own chair and scream at the top of your lungs, "PIG!" I
guarantee that if you do this three or four times in a public place, you won't overeat anymore! You'll
link too much pain to this behavior! Just remember: the more outrageous

47

your approach to breaking

a pattern, the more effective it will be. One of the key distinctions to interrupting a pattern is that you
must do it in the moment the pattern is recurring. Pattern interrupts happen to us every day. When
you say, "I just lost my train of thought," you're indicating that something or someone interrupted
your pattern of concentration. Have you ever been deeply involved in a conversation with a friend, had
someone interrupt you for a moment, then come back wondering, "Where were we?" Of course you
have, and it's a classic example of a pattern interrupt.
Just remember, if we want to create change and we've learned in the past to get pleasure by taking a
circuitous route that includes a series of negative consequences, we need to break that old pattern. We
need to scramble it beyond recognition, find a new pattern (that's the next step), and condition it
again and again until it becomes our consistent approach.

HOW TO BREAK LIMITING PATTERNS OF FEELING AND ACTING
Again, often it's true that interrupting a pattern enough times can change almost anyone. A simple
way of breaking a pattern is by scrambling the sensations we link to our memories. The only reason
we're upset is that we're representing things in a certain way in our minds. For example, if your boss
yells at you, and you mentally rerun that experience the rest of the day, picturing him or her yelling at
you over and over again, then you'll feel progressively worse. Why let the experience continue to affect
you? Why not just take this record in your mind and scratch it so many times that you can't experience
those feelings anymore? Maybe you can even make it funny!
Try this right now by doing the following: Think of a situation that makes you feel sad, frustrated, or
angry. Now do the first two steps of NAC, which we've already covered. If you feel bad now about the
situation, how do you want to be able to feel? Why do you want to feel that way? What's been
preventing you from feeling that way is the sensations you've linked to this situation. Wouldn't it be
wonderful if you could feel good about it? Now get some leverage on yourself. If you don't change how
47

outrageous abscheulich; empörend, unerhört
you feel about this situation, how will you continue to feel? Pretty lousy, I'll bet! Do you want to pay
that price and continually carry around these negative sensations or upsets you have toward this
person or situation? If you were to change now, wouldn't you feel better?

THE SCRAMBLE PATTERN
You've got enough leverage; now scramble the disempowering feelings until they no longer come up.
After reading this, take the following steps.
1) See the situation in your mind that was bothering you so much. Picture it as a movie. Don't feel
upset about it; just watch it one time, seeing everything that happened.
2) Take that same experience and turn it into a cartoon. Sit up in your chair with a big, silly grin on
your face, breathing fully, and run the image backward as fast as you can so that you can see
everything happening in reverse. If somebody said something, watch them swallow their words! Let
the movie run backward in very fast motion, then run it forward again in even faster motion. Now
change the colors of the images so that everybody's faces are rainbow-colored. If there's someone in
particular who upsets you, cause their ears to grow very large like Mickey Mouse's, and their nose to
grow like Pinocchio's. Do this at least a dozen times, back and forth, sideways, scratching the record of
your imagery with tremendous speed and humor. Create some music in your mind as you do this.
Maybe it's your favorite song, or maybe some type of cartoon music. Link these weird sounds to the
old image that used to upset you. This will definitely change the sensations. Key to this whole process
is the speed at which you play back the imagery and the level of humor and exaggeration you can link
to it.
3) Now think about the situation that was bothering you, and notice how you feel now. If done
effectively, you'll easily have broken the pattern so many times you'll find it difficult or impossible to
get back into those negative feelings. This can be done with things that have been bothering you for
years. It's often a much more effective approach than trying to analyze the why's and wherefore's of a
situation, which doesn't change the sensations you link to the situation. As simplistic as it seems,
effectively scrambling a situation will work in most cases, even where trauma has been involved. Why
does it work? Because all of our feelings are based on the images we focus on in our minds and the
sounds and sensations we link to those specific images. As we change the images and sounds, we
change how we feel. Conditioning this again and again makes it difficult to get back into the
old pattern.
One way of breaking the pattern is to Just stop doing something, go "cold turkey." If you stop running
a pattern again and again, the neural pathway will gradually dissipate. Once a neural connection is
made, the brain will always have a pathway, but unless the path is used, it becomes overgrown. Like
anything else, if you don't use it, you begin to lose it. Now that you've broken the pattern that has
been holding you back, you now have the open space to ...
NAC

MASTER STEP 4

Create a New, Empowering Alternative.
This fourth step is absolutely critical to establishing long-term change. In fact, the failure by most
people to find an alternative way of getting out of pain and into the feelings of pleasure is the major
reason most people's attempts at change are only temporary. Many people get to the point where they
have to change, where change is a must, because they link so much pain to their old pattern and they
link pleasure to the idea of changing. They even interrupt their patterns. But after that, they have
nothing to replace the old pattern!
Remember, all of your neurological patterns are designed to help you get out of pain and into pleasure.
These patterns are well established, and while they may have negative side effects, if you've learned
that a habit can get you out of pain, you'll go back to it again and again since you've found no better
way to get the feelings you desire.
If you've been following each one of these steps, you've gotten clear about what you wanted and what
was preventing you from getting it, you've gotten leverage on yourself, you've interrupted the pattern,
and now you need to fill the gap with a new set of choices that will give you the same pleasurable
feelings without the negative side effects. Once you quit smoking, you must come up with a new way,
or a lot of new ways, to replace whatever benefits you used to get from the old behavior; the benefits
of the old feelings or behaviors must be preserved by the new behaviors or feelings while eliminating
the side effects. What can you replace worry with? How about massive action on a plan you have for
meeting your goals? Depression can be replaced with a focus on how to help others who are in need. If
you're not sure how to get yourself out of pain and to feel pleasure as a replacement to your smoking,
drinking, worrying, or other undesirable emotion or behavior, you can simply find the answers by
modeling people who have turned things around for themselves. Find people who have made the
lasting changes; I guarantee you'll find that they had an alternative to replace the old behavior.
A good example of this is my friend Fran Tarkenton. When Fran and I first started doing my Personal
Power television shows together, he had a habit that truly surprised me. He was addicted to chewing
tobacco. I'd be in a meeting with Fran, and suddenly he would turn his head and spit. This did not
match my picture of this powerful and elegant man. But he'd been doing it for over twenty years. As
Fran would tell me later, chewing tobacco was one of his greatest pleasures in life. It was like his best
friend. If he was on the road and felt alone, he could chew tobacco, and he wouldn't feel alone
anymore. In fact, he told a group of his friends one time that if he had to choose between sex and
chewing tobacco, he'd chew tobacco! How's that for a false neuro-association? He'd wired a pathway
out of pain and into pleasure via the highway of chewing tobacco. After years of continual use and
reinforcement, he had created a neural trunk line from tobacco to pleasure; thus, this was his favorite
route of change.
What got him to change his behavior? Finally, he got enough leverage on himself. One day, with a little
help from "a friend," he began to see that chewing tobacco was massively incongruent with the quality
of man he'd become. It represented a lack of control over his life, and since being in charge of his life
is one of Fran's highest values, that was a standard he could not break. It was too painful to be in that
position. He started to direct his mind's focus to the possibility of mouth cancer. He pictured it vividly
until pretty soon he was driven away from the idea of using tobacco. The taste of it started to disgust
him. These images helped him to get leverage on himself and interrupt the pattern he'd previously
linked to using tobacco for pleasure.
The next most important key was that Fran found new ways to get pleasure that were even more
effective than tobacco. He poured himself into his business like never before, and started producing
results that have made his company, KnowledgeWare, one of the most successful computer software
companies on Wall Street. Even more powerfully, now that he needed a new companion, he decided to
attract a real one, and found the woman of his dreams and learned to get the kinds of emotions and
feelings from his relationship with her that he could never get from any other source.
Often, if we just break our old patterns enough, our brains will automatically search for a replacement
pattern to give us the feelings we desire. This is why people who finally break the pattern of smoking
sometimes gain weight: their brains look for a new way to create the same kinds of pleasurable
feelings, and now they eat mass quantities of food to get them. The key, then, is for us to consciously
choose the new behaviors or feelings with which we're going to replace the old ones.

STUDIES IN TRANSFORMATION
A statistical study was conducted by researcher Nancy Mann to evaluate the level of rehabilitation in
reformed drug abusers, and the adoption of a replacement behavior appears to play a major role even
in this complex field of change. The first group in the study was forced to give up their addiction
through some external pressure, often applied by the legal system. As we talked about in the section
on leverage, external pressure rarely has a lasting impact. Sure enough, these men and women
returned to their old habits as soon as the pressure was lifted, i.e., as soon as they were released from
jail. A second group truly wanted to quit, and tried to do so on their own. Their leverage was primarily
internal. As a result, their behavioral changes lasted a great deal longer, often as much as two years
after the initial commitment. What eventually caused a relapse was suffering a significant amount of
stress. When this occurred, they often reverted back to their drug habit as a way of getting out of pain
and into pleasure. Why? Because they had not found a replacement for the old neural pathway. The
third group replaced their addiction with a new alternative, something that gave them the feelings they
had sought originally—or perhaps something that made them feel even better. Many found fulfilling
relationships, spiritual enlightenment, a career that they could be completely passionate about. As a
result, many never returned to the old drug habits, and the majority lasted an average of over eight
years before any backsliding occurred. The people who succeeded in kicking their drug habits followed
the first four steps of NAC, and that's why they were so successful. Some of them lasted only eight
years, however. Why? Because they didn't utilize the fifth and critical step of NAC.
NAC

MASTER STEP 5

Condition the New Pattern Until It's Consistent.
Conditioning is the way to make sure that a change you create is consistent and lasts long-term. The
simplest way to condition something is simply to rehearse48 it again and again until a neurological way
is created. If you find an empowering alternative, imagine doing it until you see that it can get you
out of pain and into pleasure quickly. Your brain will begin to associate this as a new way of producing
this result on a consistent basis. If you don't do this, you'll go back to the old pattern. If you rehearse
the new, empowering alternative again and again with tremendous emotional intensity, you'll carve
out a pathway, and with even more repetition and emotion, it will become a highway to this new way
of achieving results, and it will become a part of your habitual behavior. Remember, your brain can't
tell the difference between something you vividly imagine and something you actually experience.
Conditioning ensures that you automatically travel along the new route, that if you spot one of the "off
ramps" you used to take all the time, now you just speed past them—in fact, they'll actually become
difficult to take.
The power of conditioning can't be overestimated. I read recently that Boston Celtics great Larry Bird
was doing a soft-drink commercial in which he was supposed to miss a jump shot. He made nine
baskets in a row before he could get himself to miss! That's how strongly he's conditioned himself over
the years. When that ball hits his hands, he automatically goes through a pattern that is aimed at
putting the ball through the hoop. I'm sure that if you examined the portion of Larry Bird's brain that is
linked to that motion, you would discover a substantial neural pathway. Realize that you and I can
condition any behavior within ourselves if we do it with enough repetition and emotional intensity.
The next step is to set up a schedule to reinforce your new behavior. How can you reward yourself for
succeeding? Don't wait until you've gone a year without smoking. When you've gone a day, give
yourself a reward! Don't wait until you've lost eighty pounds. Don't even wait until you've lost a pound.
The minute you can push the plate away with food still on it, give yourself a pat on the back. Set up a
series of short-term goals, or milestones, and as you reach each one, immediately reward yourself. If
you've been depressed or worried, now each time you take action instead of worrying, or each time
you smile when somebody asks how you're doing and you say, "Great," give yourself a reward for
already beginning to make the changes necessary to ensure your long-term success.
In this way, your nervous system learns to link great pleasure to change. People who want to lose
weight don't always see immediate results—usually losing a couple of pounds doesn't miraculously
transform you into an Elle McPherson or a Mel Gibson. So it's important to reward yourself as soon as
you take some specific actions or make any positive emotional progress, like choosing to run around
the block instead of running to the nearest McDonald's. If you don't, you may find yourself saying,
"Okay, I've lost a pound so far, but I'm still fat. This will take forever. I have such a long way to go ..."
Then you might use these short-term assessments as excuses to binge. Understanding the power of
48

rehearse MUSIK, THEATER proben
reinforcement will speed up the process of conditioning a new pattern. Recently I had the pleasure of
reading an excellent book that I highly recommend to those who really want to make a thorough study
of conditioning. It's entitled Don't Shoot the Dog! by Karen Pryor. This book sets forth some simple
distinctions about modifying animal behavior that parallel my own distinctions gained in years of
shaping human behavior.
What's fascinating is how similar animals and humans are in terms of the forces that drive our actions.
Knowing the fundamentals of conditioning enables us to take control of those forces and create the
destiny of our choice. We can live like animals, manipulated by circumstances and those around us—or
we can learn from these laws, using them to maximize our fullest potential. Pryor discusses in her
book how she learned to utilize pain to train animals for years: whips and a chair for lions, the bridle
for horses, the leash for dogs. But she ran into difficulty when she began to work with dolphins,
because when she tried to give them pain, they just swam away! This caused her to develop a more
thorough understanding of the dynamics of positive reinforcement training.
"There is nothing training cannot do. Nothing is above its reach. It can turn bad morals to good; it can
destroy bad principles and recreate good ones; it can lift men to angelship."
MARK TWAIN
The first organizing principle of any type of "Success Conditioning" is the power of reinforcement. You
and I must know that in order to get ourselves to consistently produce any behavior or emotion, we
must create a conditioned pattern. All patterns are the result of reinforcement; specifically, the key to
creating consistency in our emotions and behaviors is conditioning.

THE LAW OF REINFORCEMENT49
Any pattern of emotion or behavior that is continually reinforced will become an automatic and
conditioned response. Anything we fail to reinforce will eventually dissipate. We can reinforce our own
behavior or someone else's through positive reinforcement, that is, every time we produce the
behavior we want, we give a reward. That reward can be praise, a gift, a new freedom, etc. Or we can
use negative reinforcement. This might be a frown, a loud noise, or even physical punishment. It's
crucial for us to understand that reinforcement is not the same as punishment and reward.
Reinforcement is responding to a behavior immediately after it occurs, while punishment and reward
may occur long afterward.
Appropriate timing is absolutely critical to effective conditioning. If a coach yells, "Great!" when the
basketball team executes a perfect pick-and-roll, it has a lot more impact than if he waited until they
debriefed later in the locker room. Why? Because we always want to link the sensations of
reinforcement in the pattern that is occurring. One of the problems with our judicial system is that
when people commit criminal acts, they are sometimes not punished until years later. Intellectually
49

reinforcement Verstärkung weiblich
they may know the reason for their punishment, but the pattern of behavior that generated this
problem in the first place is still intact—it has not been interrupted, nor does it have any pain linked
to it.
This is the only way to truly change our behaviors and emotions long term. We must train our brains
to do the things that are effective, not intellectually but neurologically. The challenge, of course, is that
most of us don't realize that we're all conditioning each other and shaping each other's behaviors
constantly. Often, we're conditioning people negatively instead of positively.
A simple example of this occurred with my daughter Jolie's ex-boyfriend. Jolie was very busy with
school, dance, and a play she was in. He wanted her to call him every single day, and when she
missed a few days and then called him, he gave her tremendous amounts of pain. He clearly wanted
her to call more frequently, yet his strategy for reinforcement was to badger50 and berate her when
she did call.
Have you ever been guilty of this? If you want your boyfriend, girl- friend, spouse, or significant other
to call you more often, how effective do you think it would be to nag them to call? When they finally do
call, do you greet them with statements like, "Oh, so you finally picked up the phone! Will wonders
never cease? Why do I always have to be the one who makes the call?" What you're doing is training
him or her not to call you! You're giving pain right after they do the very thing you want. What will
happen as a result of this? Pain will be linked to calling you; he or she will avoid it even more in the
future. In Jolie's case, this pattern was continuous, going on for months until Jolie felt that she
couldn't win. If she didn't call, she'd get pain. If she did call, she'd get pain. As you might guess, this
pattern of negative reinforcement permeated51 many aspects of their relationship and, eventually, the
relationship ended.
If you truly want someone to call you, then when they do call, you need to respond with delight. If you
tell them how much you miss them, how much you love them, how grateful you are to talk with them,
do you think that they'll be more inclined to call again? Remember, link pleasure to any behavior you
want someone to repeat. In my consulting with companies across the United States, I've noted that
most companies try to motivate their employees by using negative reinforcement as their primary
strategy, trying to use fear of punishment as its prime motivator. This will work in the short term, but
not in the long term. Sooner or later, companies run into the same problems that eastern Europe has:
people will live in fear only for so long before they revolt.
The second major strategy companies use is financial incentives. While this is an excellent idea and is
usually appreciated, there is a limit to its effectiveness. There is a point of diminishing return at which
all the additional incentives don't really induce a greater quality of work from people. In fact, most
companies find that there's a limit to what they cando in this area. If one constantly reinforces with
money, people begin to expect that when they do something of great value, they must have an
immediate economic return. They begin to work strictly for financial reward and won't do anything
unless they get it, surpassing and stripping the capacity of the business to keep up with the economic
demands of its employees.

50
51

badger 1. ZOOLOGIE Dachs; 2. plagen, jemandem zusetzen
permeate durchdringen; dringen (into in Akkusativ; through durch)
The third and most powerful way to motivate people is through personal development. By helping your
employees to grow and expand personally, they begin to feel passionate about life, people, and their
jobs. This makes them want to contribute more. They do it out of a sense of personal pride rather
than pressure from the outside. This doesn't mean you shouldn't have an incentive program; just
make sure you have the most powerful incentive of all, which is to help people expand and grow.
"Good and evil, reward and punishment, are the only motives to a rational creature: these are the spur
and reins whereby all mankind are set on work, and guided."
JOHN LOCKE

SCHEDULE YOUR REINFORCEMENT SO CHANGE LASTS!
When you're beginning to establish a new behavior or a new emotional pattern, it's very important that
you reinforce yourself or anyone else you're trying to establish these new patterns for. In the
beginning, every time you perform the desired behavior (for example, pushing a plate away with food
still on it), you need to give yourself acknowledgement— pleasurable reinforcement of a type that you
truly will appreciate and enjoy. However, if you reinforce the behavior every time thereafter,
eventually your rewards will no longer be effective or appreciated. What at one time was a unique and
enjoyable surprise will become an expected norm.
Because of my commitment to help those in need, whenever I go through airports, I invariably give to
those who request money. I'll never forget one particular gentleman who had staked his claim in a
particular spot in front of a terminal I frequented. Every time I came by, I gave him some money. On
one morning, I was very rushed and had no money in my pocket. As I walked quickly by, I smiled and
said, "Hello! I'm sorry, but I don't have any money today." He became angry because I was no longer
giving him something that he once was thrilled to receive from me.
You and I need to remember that the element of pleasant surprise is one of the most enjoyable
experiences that a human being can have. It's so much more important than most of us realize. This is
the very reason why, if you want a behavior to last long-term, it's invaluable that you understand and
utilize what's known as a variable schedule of reinforcement.
Let me give you a simple example from dolphin training. In the beginning, to train a dolphin to jump,
trainers wait for the dolphin to jump on its own. They catch the animals doing something right and
then reward it with a fish. By doing this each time the dolphin jumps on its own, the dolphin eventually
makes the neuro-association that if he jumps, he'll get a fish. This pairing of pleasure to a behavior
that the trainer desires allows the trainer to condition the dolphin to jump again and again.
Eventually, though, the trainer will give the fish only when the dolphin jumps higher. By slowly raising
the standards, the trainer can shape the dolphin's behavior. Here's the key: if the dolphin is always rewarded, he may become habituated and will no longer give 100 percent. So, in the future, the dolphin
is rewarded sometimes after the first jump or perhaps after the fifth, or after the second. A dolphin is
never sure which jump will be rewarded. This sense of anticipation that a reward may be given,
coupled with the uncertainty as to which try will be rewarded, causes the dolphin to consistently give
its full effort. The reward is never taken for granted.
This is the identical force that drives people to gamble. Once they've gambled and been rewarded—
and linked intense pleasure to the reward—that excitement and anticipation pushes them to go
forward.
When they haven't been rewarded in a while, often they have an even stronger sense that this time
they'll be rewarded. What drives the gambler is the possibility of winning again. If a person were to
gamble without ever receiving a reward, they would give up. However, receiving just a few small
rewards, winning just a few hands, "earning" back just some of their money, keeps them in a state of
anticipation that they could hit the jackpot.
This is why people who discontinue a bad habit (like smoking or gambling) for a period of months, and
then decide to have "just one more hit," are actually reinforcing the very pattern that they're trying to
break and making it much more difficult to be free of the habit for a lifetime. If you smoke one more
cigarette, you're stimulating your nervous system to expect that in the future you'll reward yourself
this way again. You're keeping that neuro-association highly active and, in fact, strengthening the very
habit you're trying to break!
If you want to reinforce a person's behavior long term, you may want to utilize what's known as a
fixed schedule of reinforcement. In her book, Karen Pryor describes training a dolphin to make ten
jumps. In order to make sure that the dolphin consistently jumps ten times, you'll want to reward
them on the tenth jump each and every time. You can't demand too many behaviors before
reinforcement occurs, but if the dolphin is rewarded only on the tenth jump, the dolphin soon learns
that it does not need to make as great an effort on the previous nine jumps, and quality declines.
This is the same reaction we might see in people who receive a paycheck every two weeks. Employees
know there are certain things expected of them, for which they receive regular compensation. The
challenge is that many people learn to do only the minimum necessary to receive the reward because
there is no surprise. In the workplace, pay is expected, of course. But if it is the only reward, then
workers will do only what is expected and the minimum they can do for the pay. However, if there are
occasional surprises—like recognition, bonuses, promotions, and other perks—then they will put forth
the extra effort, in hopes and anticipation that they'll be rewarded and acknowledged. Remember,
these surprises must not be predictable, or they become ineffective and taken for granted—this
expectation will drive the behavior.
Vary your rewards, and you'll see greater results in making change within yourself or anyone you're
managing. There is a third tool for reinforcement that can also be used: it's known as the jackpot. A
jackpot can help you to compound the reinforcement. If, for example, once in a rare while you give a
dolphin not only one fish, but three or four, for its behavior, it makes the dolphin anticipate even more
that if it just puts out that extra effort, there might be a huge reward. This compels the dolphin to
consistently give more of itself.
Human beings respond similarly. Often in companies, when people are given a reward that's much
greater than anticipated, it can create great motivation to continue to give great service in the future
with the anticipation that they may receive an even greater reward. This same principle can work like
magic with your children!

CREATE A "JUMP-START"
The jackpot principle can also be used with someone who's not motivated to produce any results
whatsoever. Again, if dolphin trainers have an animal which they seem to be unable to motivate at all,
they will sometimes give it a dozen fish, even though it has done nothing to earn it. The pleasure that
this creates is sometimes enough to break the dolphin's old pattern and put it into a state of such
pleasure that it then becomes willing to be trained. Again, human beings are similar. If someone who
seems not to have done anything right is suddenly given a reward, just out of compassion and caring,
this can stimulate them to take on new levels and types of behavior and performance.
The most important thing to remember about conditioning, however, is to reinforce the desired
behavior immediately. The minute you find yourself responding playfully to what used to frustrate you,
reinforce yourself. Do it again and create even more pleasure. Laugh a bit. Remember, each time you
create a strong emotional feeling, either positive or negative, you're creating a connection in your
nervous system. If you repeat that pattern again and again, visualizing the same imagery that makes
you feel strong or makes you laugh, you'll find it easier to be strong or to laugh in the future. The
pattern will be well established.
The minute you, or anyone you want to reinforce, does something right, create an immediate reward.
Reinforce it consistently with the kind of reward that you, or that individual, personally want or desire
most.
Give yourself the emotional reward of turning on your favorite music or smiling or seeing yourself
accomplishing your goals. Conditioning is critical. This is how we produce consistent results. Once
again, remember that any pattern of emotional behavior that is reinforced or rewarded on a consistent
basis will become conditioned and automatic. Any pattern that we fail to reinforce will eventually
dissipate. Now that you've accomplished the first five steps, let's go to the final step.. . .

NAC

MASTER STEP 6
Test It!

Let's review what you've accomplished: you've decided upon the new pattern of emotion or behavior
that you desire; you've gotten leverage on yourself to change it; you've interrupted the old pattern;
you've found a new alternative; and you've conditioned it until it's consistent. The only step left is to
test it to make sure that it's going to work in the future. One of the ways of doing this that's taught in
Neuro-Linguistic Programming is "future pacing." This means that you imagine the situation that used
to frustrate you, for example, and notice if in fact it still makes you feel frustrated or if your new
pattern of feeling "fascinated" has replaced it. If normally you still have this urge to smoke every time
you feel overwhelmed, imagine yourself in an overwhelming situation and notice if instead you have an
urge to read or run or whatever new alternative you've conditioned. By imagining the same stimuli
that used to trigger your old emotion or behavior and noting that you do feel certain that your new
empowering alternative is automatic, you will know that this new pattern will work for you in the future.
In addition, you must test the ecology of the change you've just made. The word "ecology" implies the
study of consequences. What will the impact of these changes you've made in yourself have on those
around you? Will they support your business and personal relationships? Make certain that this new
pattern will be appropriate, based on your current lifestyle, beliefs, and values.
On the next page is a simple checklist that you can use to help yourself be certain that your new
success pattern will last and that it's appropriate.
If your attempt at creating this pattern didn't last, you need to recycle back to Step 1. Are you really
clear about what you want and why you want it?
Review Step 2; most people who've tried unsuccessfully to make a change usually don't have enough
leverage. You may need to make a public commitment in order to get more leverage on yourself. Make
it to those people who will not let you off the hook!
If you feel that there's enough leverage, check Step 3: if you know what you want and you've got
enough leverage, it's very possible that you're like the fly beating itself repeatedly against the window
pane. You've done the same things over and over again, with more and more intensity, but you
haven't changed your approach. You must interrupt your pattern. If you feel that all these steps are in
place, go to Step 4. If your efforts still have not produced a change, you're dearly demonstrating that
you've left out this step. Find a new, empowering alternative for getting yourself out of pain and into
pleasure that is as powerful and convenient as your old approach was. All this means is that you now
have an opportunity to explore being a little more creative. Find a role model-somebody else who's
been able to eliminate this habit or negative set of emotions that you want to change.

THE ECOLOGY CHECK
1. Make certain pain is fully associated with the old pattern. When you think of your old behavior or
feelings, do you picture and feel things that are painful now instead of pleasurable?
2. Make certain pleasure is fully associated with the new pattern. When you think of your new behavior
or feelings, do you picture and feel things that are pleasurable now instead of painful?
3. Align with your values, beliefs, and rules. Is the new behavior or feeling consistent with the values,
beliefs, and rules in your life? (We will discuss these in later chapters.)
4. Make sure the benefits of the old pattern have been maintained. Will the new behavior or feeling
still allow you to get benefits and feelings of pleasure that you used to get from the old pattern?
5. Future pace—Imagine yourself behaving in this new way in the future. Imagine the thing that would
have triggered you to adopt the old pattern. Feel certain that you can use your new pattern instead of
the old one.

If you've started to make a change, but then not followed through, you obviously haven't reinforced
your pattern with enough pleasure. Use Step 5, conditioning. Utilize both variable and fixed schedules
of reinforcement to make sure that your new, empowering pattern lasts. The six steps of NAC can be
used for anything: challenges with relationships, problems in business, being stuck in a pattern of
yelling at your children. Let's say you worry too much about things over which you have no control.
How can you use the six steps to change this disempowering pattern?
1) Ask yourself, "What do I want to do instead of worry?"
2) Get leverage on yourself and realize what worry does to destroy your life. Bring it to a threshold;
see what it would cost you ultimately in your life so that you're not willing to pay that price anymore.
Imagine the joy of getting this monkey off your back and being truly free once and for all!
3) Interrupt the pattern! Every time you worry, break the pattern by being totally outrageous. Stick
your finger up your nose, or belt out "Oh, What a Beautiful Morning!" at the top of your lungs.
4) Create an empowering alternative. What will you do instead of worry? Pull out your journal and
write down a plan of what you can do immediately instead. Maybe you can go for a run, and while
you're running, you can think of new solutions.
5) Condition the new pattern; vividly imagine and rehearse this new pattern with tremendous
emotional intensity and repetition until this new thought, behavior or emotional pattern is automatic.
Reinforce yourself by taking the first step: see yourself succeeding again and again. Seeing
the results in advance can give you the pleasure you desire. Again, use repetition and emotional
intensity to condition the new pattern until it's consistent.
6) Test it and see if it works. Think about the situation that used to worry you, and see that you no
longer worry in this situation. You can even use these same six master steps of NAC to negotiate a
contract.
1) The first step is to lay the groundwork. Get clear about what you want and what has prevented you
from getting it. What does the other person want? What's in it for both of you? How will you know you
have a successful contract?
2) Get leverage by getting that person to link pain to not making the deal, and pleasure to making it.
3) Interrupt the pattern of any belief or idea that's keeping the deal from moving ahead.
4) Create an alternative that neither of you thought of before that will meet both your needs.
5) Reinforce that alternative by constantly reinforcing the pleasure and the positive impact of this
alternative.
6) See if it's going to work out for everybody, a win-win situation. If so, negotiate to a successful
conclusion.
The same principles can be used to get the kids to clean their rooms, improve the quality of your
marriage, boost your company's level of quality, get more enjoyment out of your job, and make your
country a better place to live.
By the way, sometimes our kids use these same six steps on us in abbreviated form. Remember what
I said: if you get enough leverage and interrupt somebody's pattern strongly enough, they'll find a new
pattern and condition it. A friend of mine tried almost everything he knew to stop smoking. Finally his
pattern was broken. How? His six-year-old daughter walked in one day while he was lighting up. She
knew what she wanted, she had massive leverage, and she interrupted his pattern by crying, "Daddy,
please stop killing yourself!"
"Honey," he said, "what are you talking about? What's wrong?" She repeated herself. He said, "Honey,
I'm not killing myself." She nodded her head, pointed to the cigarette and sobbed, "Daddy, please stop
killing yourself! I want you to be there .. . when I get m-a-r-r-i-e-d..."
This was a man who'd tried to quit dozens of times, and nothing had worked—until then. The
cigarettes were out the door that day, and he hasn't smoked since. With his heartstrings firmly
grasped in her tiny hands, she instantly got what she wanted. Since then he's found many alternatives
to smoking that give him the same pleasurable sensations.
If all you do is the first three steps of NAC, that may be enough to create tremendous change. Once
you've decided what you want, gained leverage, and interrupted the pattern, life often provides you
with new ways of looking at things. And if the leverage is strong enough, you'll be compelled to find a
new pattern and condition it—and you can pretty much count on the world to give you the test. Now
you have the NAC of change! The key is to use it. But you won't unless you know what you're using it
for. You've got to know what you truly desire; you must find ...
7
HOW TO GET WHAT YOU REALLY WANT
"All emotions are pure which gather you and lift you
up; that emotion is impure which seizes only one
side of your being and so distorts you."
tIAlKTCD 1JADTA 0 I 1 V C
RAINER MARIA R1LKE
"Gimme my first attack."* Elvis Presley always called for his first hit this way, fulfilling a bizarre daily
ritual designed to make sure the King of Heartbreak Hotel got to sleep after a strenuous night
performing. Elvis's assistant would open the first envelope and give him "the usual": a rainbow-colored
assortment of barbiturates (Amytal, Carbrital, Nembutal or Seconal), Quaaludes, Valium, and Placidyl,
followed by three shots of Demerol injected just below his bare shoulder blades.
Before he went to sleep, Elvis's kitchen staff, which was on duty around the clock, would go to work. It
then became a race to see how much food the King could consume before falling asleep. Typically,
he'd eat three cheeseburgers and six or seven banana splits before nodding off52. Often, his assistants
would have to dislodge food from his windpipe to keep him from choking to death. Elvis would then
sleep for about four hours before stirring53.
So groggy54 that he had to be carried to the bathroom, he would make his second request by feebly55
tugging56 at his assistant's shin57. Elvis was unable to take the drugs himself, so the aide would pop
the pills into his mouth, and carefully pour water down his throat. Elvis was rarely able to ask for the
third attack. Instead, as a matter of routine, an aide would administer the dosage and let him continue
to sleep until mid-afternoon, when the bloated58 King would jump-start his body by popping Dexedrine
and stuffing cocaine-soaked59 swabs60 up his nose before taking to the stage again.
On the day of his death, Elvis remained lucid and saved all of the "attacks" for one fatal dose. Why
would a man, so universally adored by fans and seeming to have it all, regularly abuse his body and
then take his own life in such a horrific way? According to David Stanley, Elvis's half brother, it was
because he much preferred being drugged and numb to being conscious and miserable.
52
nod 1. (-dd-) nicken (mit); nod off einnicken; have a nodding acquaintance with someone jemanden flüchtig
kennen; 2. Nicken sächlich
53
stir 1. (-rr-) (um)rühren; (sich) rühren oder bewegen; übertragen jemanden aufwühlen; stir up Unruhe stiften;
Streit entfachen; Erinnerungen wachrufen; 2. give something a stir etwas (um)rühren; cause a stir, create a stir
für Aufsehen sorgen
54
groggy umgangssprachlich (-ier, -iest) groggy, schwach oder wackelig (auf den Beinen)
55
feeble (feebler, feeblest) schwach
56
tug 1. (-gg-) zerren oder ziehen (an Dativ oder at an Dativ); 2. give something a tug zerren oder ziehen an
(Dativ)
57
shin 1. auch shinbone ANATOMIE Schienbein; 2. (-nn-): shin up (down) Baum und so weiter hinauf(herunter)klettern
58
bloated (an)geschwollen, (auf)gedunsen; übertragen aufgeblasen
59
soak einweichen (in in Dativ); durchnässen; soak up aufsaugen; intransitives Verb sickern; leave the dirty
clothes to soak weichen Sie die Schmutzwäsche ein
Unfortunately it's not difficult to think of other famous figures—people at the top of their professions in
the arts and business—who also brought about their own demise, either directly or indirectly. Think of
writers like Ernest Hemingway and Sylvia Plath, actors like William Holden and Freddie Prinze, singers
like Mama Cass Elliot and Janis Joplin. What do these people have in common? First, they're no longer
here, and we all experienced the loss. Second, they were all sold a bill of goods that said, "Someday,
someone, somehow, something . . . and then I'll be happy." But when they achieved success, when
they arrived on Easy Street and got a firsthand look at the American Dream, they found that happiness
still eluded them. So they continued to chase it, keeping the pain of existence at bay by drinking,
smoking, overeating, until finally they got the oblivion61 they craved62. They never discovered the true
source of happiness.
What these people demonstrated is something all too familiar to so many people: 1) They didn't know
what they really wanted out of life, so they distracted themselves with a variety of artificial mood
alterants. 2) They developed not just neurological pathways, but expressways to pain. And their
habits were driving them down these highways On a regular basis. Despite achieving the levels of
success they'd once only dreamed of, and despite being surrounded by the love and admiration of
millions of fans, they had far more references for pain. They became quite adept at generating it
quickly and easily because they'd made virtual trunk lines to it. 3) They didn't know how to make
themselves feel good. They had to turn to some outside force to help them deal with the present. 4)
They never learned the nuts and bolts of how to consciously direct the focus of their own minds. They
allowed the pain and pleasure of their environments to control them rather than taking control
themselves. Now, contrast these stories with a letter I received recently from a woman who utilized
my work to utterly63 and completely change the quality of her life:
Dear Tony,
I had been severely abused my entire life from infancy until the death of my second husband. As a
result of the abuse and severe trauma, I developed a mental illness known as Multiple Personality
Disorder with forty-nine different personalities. None of my personalities knew about the others, or
what had happened in each of their lives.
The only relief I had in forty-nine years of living as a multiple was in the form of self-destructive
behavior. I know it sounds strange, but self-mutilation used to give relief. After one of my many
attempts at suicide, 1 was sent to the hospital and put under a doctor's care. In order to integrate the
personalities, I had to go back to the original trauma that created each personality. That trauma had
to be remembered, relived, and felt. Each of my alters handled a specific function, a selective ability to
remember, and usually a single emotional tone. I worked with an expert in the field of MPD, and he
helped me to integrate all forty-nine personalities into one. What kept me going through all of the
different processes we used was feeling that many of my people were very unhappy and my life had
become so chaotic (one alter did not know what the other was doing, and we found ourselves in all
kinds of situations and places that when I switched, I had no memory of). We thought that by
60
61
62
63

swab MEDIZIN 1. Tupfer; Abstrich; 2. (-bb-) Wunde abtupfen
oblivion Vergessen(heit)
crave sich sehnen (for, after nach)
utter1 total, völlig
becoming one we would be happy—the ultimate goal. That was my misconception. What a shocker! I
lived a year of hell. I found myself very unhappy and grieving for each of my personalities. I missed
each of my people and sometimes wanted them back the way they were. This was very difficult, and I
made three more attempts at suicide that year, and again was admitted to a hospital.
During the past year, I happened to see your program on TV and ordered your thirty-day tape series.
Personal Power. I listened to them over and over, grasping at anything that I could use. My
breakthrough came when I started to listen to your monthly POWERTALKs. I learned things from you
as a single being that I never learned as a multiple. I learned for the first time in fifty years that
happiness comes from within. As a single being I now have the memories of the horrors that each of
the forty-nine endured. When these memories come up I can look at them, and if they became
overbearing, I can now change my point of focus as I learned from you, and not in a dissociative way
as I had done before. No longer do I have to put myself in an amnesiac trance and switch to another
person. I am learning more and more about myself, and am learning how to live as a single being. I
know that I have a long way to go and a lot of exploring to do. I am sorting out my goals and planning
how to get there, for now, I have begun to lose weight and plan to be at goal weight for Christmas (a
nice gift to me). I also know that I would like to have a healthy, nonabusive relationship with a man.
Previous to my hospital admittance, I worked full-time for IBM and had four businesses. Today, I am
running a new business and am enjoying the increased sales I have been able to realize since my
release from the hospital. I am getting to know my children and grandchildren, but most importantly,
I'm getting to know me."
Sincerely,
Elizabeth Pietrzak

WHAT DO YOU WANT?
Ask yourself what you truly want in life. Do you want a loving marriage, the respect of your children?
Do you want plenty of money, fast cars, a thriving business, a house on the hill? Do you want to travel
the world, visit exotic ports of call, see historical landmarks firsthand? Do you want to be idolized by
millions as a rock musician or as a celebrity with your star on Hollywood Boulevard? Do you want to
leave your mark for posterity as the inventor of a time travel machine? Do you want to work with
Mother Teresa to save the world, or take a proactive role in making a measurable impact
environmentally?
Whatever you desire or crave, perhaps you should ask yourself, "Why do I want these things?" Don't
you want fine cars, for example, because you really desire the feelings of accomplishment and prestige
you think they would bring? Why do you want a great family life? Is it because you think it will give
you feelings of love, intimacy, connection, or warmth? Do you want to save the world because of the
feelings of contribution and making a difference you believe this will give you? In short, then, isn't it
true that what you really want is simply to change the way you fed? What it all comes down to is the
utter2 äußern, Seufzer und so weiter ausstoßen, Wort sagen
fact that you want these things or results because you see them as a means to achieving certain
feelings, emotions, or states that you desire.
When somebody kisses you, what makes you feel good in that moment? Is it wet tissue touching wet
tissue that really triggers the feeling? Of course not! If that's true, kissing your dog would turn you on!
All of our emotions are nothing but a flurry of biochemical storms in our brains—and we can spark
them at any moment. But first we must learn how to take control of them consciously instead of living
in reaction. Most of our emotional responses are learned responses to the environment. We've
deliberately modeled some of them, and stumbled across others.
Simply being aware of these factors is the foundation for understanding the power of state. Without a
doubt, everything you and I do, we do to avoid pain or gain pleasure, but we can instantly change
what we believe will lead to pain or pleasure by redirecting our focus and changing our mentalemotional-physiological states. As I said in Chapter 3 of Unlimited Power:
A state can be defined as the sum of millions of neurological processes happening within us—the sum
total of our experience at any moment in time. Most of our states happen without any conscious
direction on our pan. We see something, and we respond to it by going into a state. It may be a
resourceful and useful state, or an unresourceful and limiting state, but there's not much that most of
us do to control it.
Have you ever found yourself unable to remember a friend's name? Or how to spell a "difficult" word
like .. . "house"? How come you weren't able to do this? You certainly knew the answer. Is it because
you're stupid? No, it's because you were in a stupid state! The difference between acting badly or
brilliantly is not based on your ability, but on the state of your mind and/or body in any given moment.
You can be gifted with the courage and determination of Marva Collins, the grace and flair of Fred
Astaire, the strength and endurance of Nolan Ryan, the compassion and intellect of Albert Einstein—
but if you continually submerge yourself in negative states, you'll never fulfill that promise of
excellence.
However, if you know the secret of accessing your most resourceful states, you can literally work
wonders. The state that you're in at any given moment determines your perceptions of reality and thus
your decisions and behavior. In other words, your behavior is not the result of your ability, but of the
state that you're in at this moment. To change your ability, change your state. To open up the
multitude of resources that lie within you, put yourself in a state of resourcefulness and active
expectancy—and watch miracles happen!
So how can we change our own emotional states? Think of your states as operating a lot like a TV set.
In order to have "bright, vivid color with incredible sound," you need to plug in and turn on. Turning on
your physiology is like giving the set the electricity it needs to operate. If you don't have the juice,
you'll have no picture, no sound, just a blank screen. Similarly, if you don't turn on by using your
entire body, in other words, your physiology, you may indeed find yourself unable to spell "house."
Have you ever woken up and stumbled around, not able to think clearly or function until you moved
around enough to get your blood flowing?
Once the "static" has cleared, you're turned on, and the ideas begin to flow. If you're in the wrong
state, you're not going to get any reception, even if you've got the right ideas. Of course, once you're
plugged in, you've got to be tuned to the right channel to get what you really want. Mentally, you've
got to focus on what empowers you. Whatever you focus on—whatever you tune in to—you will feel
more intensely. So if you don't like what you're doing, maybe it's time to change the channel.
There are unlimited sensations, unlimited ways of looking at virtually anything in life. All of the
sensations that you want are available all of the time, and all you've got to do is to tune in to the right
channel. There are two primary ways, then, to change your emotional state: by changing the way you
use your physical body, or by changing your focus.

PHYSIOLOGY: THE POWER OF MOVEMENT
One of the most powerful distinctions that I've made in the last ten years of my life is simply-this:
Emotion is created by motion. Everything that we feel is the result of how we use our bodies. Even the
most minute changes in our facial expressions or our gestures will shift the way that we're feeling in
any moment, and therefore the way we evaluate our lives—the way we think and the way we act.
Try something ridiculous with me for a second. Pretend you're a rather bored and humorless
symphony conductor rhythmically swinging your arms in and out. Do it very s-l-o-w-l-y. Don't get too
excited; just do it as a matter of r-o-u-t-i-n-e and make sure your face reflects a state of boredom.
Notice how that feels. Now take your hands, clap them together explosively, and SNAP them back out
as fast as you can with a big, silly grin on your face! Intensify this by adding the vocal movement of an
outrageously loud and explosive sound—the movement of air through your chest, throat, and mouth
will change how you feel even more radically. That motion and speed you've created, both in your
body and your vocal chords, will instantly change the way you feel.
Every emotion you ever feel has specific physiology linked to it: posture, breathing, patterns of
movement, facial expressions. For depression, these are certainly obvious. In Unlimited Power, I talked
about the physical attributes of depression, where your eyes are focused, how you hold yourself, and
so forth. Once you learn how you use your body when in certain emotional states, you can return to
those states, or avoid them, simply by changing your physiology. The challenge is that most of us
limit ourselves to just a few habitual patterns of physiology. We assume them automatically, not
realizing how great a role they play in shaping our behavior from moment to moment.
We each have over eighty different muscles in our faces, and if these muscles get accustomed to
expressing depression, boredom, or frustration, then this habitual muscular pattern literally begins to
dictate our states, not to mention our physical character. I always have people in my Date With
Destiny™ seminar write down all the emotions they feel in an average week, and out of the myriad
possibilities, I've found that the average is less than a dozen. Why? Because most people have limited
patterns of physiology that result in limited patterns of expression.

TYPES OF EMOTIONS AN INDIVIDUAL MIGHT FEEL IN A WEEK
Stressed out
Frustrated
Angry
Insecure
Lonely
Bored
Miserable
Happy
Relieved
Loved
Excited
Joyous

This is such a short menu of emotional choices when you consider the thousands of enticing states
available. Take care not to limit yourself to such a short list! I suggest you take advantage of the
whole buffet—try new things and cultivate a refined palate. How about experiencing more enthusiasm,
fascination, cheerfulness, playfulness, intrigue, sensuality, desire, gratitude, enchantment, curiosity,
creativity, capability, confidence, outrageousness, boldness, consideration, kindness, gentleness,
humor . . . Why not come up with a long list of your own?
You can experience any of these just by changing the way you use your body! You can feel strong, you
can smile, you can change anything in a minute just by laughing. You've heard the old adage,
"Someday you'll look back on this and laugh." If that's true, why not look back and laugh now? Why
wait? Wake your body up; learn to put it in pleasurable states consistently no matter what's happened.
How? Create energy by the way you think of something over and over again, and you'll change the
sensations you link to that situation in the future.
If you repeatedly use your body in weak ways, if you drop your shoulders on a regular basis, if you
walk around like you're tired, you will feel tired. How could you do otherwise? Your body leads your
emotions. The emotional state you're in then begins to affect your body, and it becomes a sort of
endless loop. Notice how you're sitting even now. Sit up right now and create more energy in your
body as you continue not only to read but also to master these principles.
What are some things you can do immediately to change your state and therefore how you feel and
how you perform? Take deep breaths in through your nose and exhale strongly through your mouth.
Put a huge grin on your face and smile at your children. If you really want to change your life, commit
for the next seven days to spending one minute five times a day, grinning from ear to ear in the mirror.
This will feel incredibly stupid, but remember, by this physical act, you will be constantly triggering this
part of your brain and creating a neuro-logical pathway to pleasure that will become habitual. So do it,
and make it fun!
Better yet, go out for a skip64 instead of a jog. Skipping is such a powerful way to change your state
because it does four things: 1) It's great exercise; 2) you'll have less stress on your body than running;

64
skip 1. (-pp-) intransitives Verb hüpfen, springen; seilhüpfen, -springen; transitives Verb etwas überspringen,
auslassen; 2. Hüpfer männlich
3) you won't be able to keep a serious look on your face; and 4) you'll entertain everybody who's
driving by! So you'll be changing other people's states, too, by making them laugh.
What a powerful thing laughter is! My son Joshua has a friend named Matt who finds it so easy to
laugh that it's infectious, and everyone who hears him starts laughing, too. If you really want to
improve your life, learn to laugh. Along with your five smiles each day, make yourself laugh
for no reason at all, three times each day for seven days.
In a recent poll conducted by Entertainment Weekly magazine, they found that 82 percent of the
people who go to movies want to laugh, 7 percent want to cry, and 3 percent want to scream. This
gives you an idea how we value the sensations of laughter over so many other things. And if you've
read Norman Cousins's books, or Dr. Deepak Chopra's, or Dr. Bernie Siegel's, or studied
psychoneuroimmunology at all, you know what laughter can do to the physical body to stimulate the
immune system.
Why not find somebody who laughs and mirror them? Have some fun. Say, "Will you do me a favor?
You've got a great laugh. Let me try and duplicate it. Coach me." I guarantee you'll crack each other
up in the process! Breathe the way they breathe; take on their posture and body movements; use the
same facial expressions; make the same sounds.
You'll feel stupid when you start, but after a while you'll get into it, and you'll both be laughing
hysterically because you both look so silly. But in the process, you'll begin to lay the neurological
networking to create laughter on a regular basis. As you do this again and again, you'll find it
very easy to laugh and you'll certainly have fun.
"We know too much and feel too little. At least we feel too little of those creative emotions from which
a good life springs."
BERTRAND RUSSELL
Anyone can continue to feel good if they already feel good, or if they're "on a roll"; it doesn't take
much to accomplish this. But the real key in life is to be able to make yourself feel good when you
don't fed good, or when you don't even want to feel good. Know that you can do this instantaneously
by using your body as a tool to change state. Once you identify the physiology attached to a state, you
can use it to create the states you desire at will. Years ago, I worked with John Denver, a man who
impresses me not only with his musical ability but also because his private persona is absolutely in line
with his public image. The reason he's succeeded is so clear; he's such an incredibly warm and caring
man.
The reason I was working with him was that he was experiencing writer's block. We identified the
times when he wrote his best songs, and discovered that their inspiration had come to him when he
was doing something physical. Usually an entire song would flow through him after he'd skied down a
mountain, flown his jet or his biplane, or driven his sports car at high speeds. Usually speed was
involved, and the physical adrenaline rush, along with the experience of focusing on the beauty of
nature, were all a major part of his creative strategy. At the time, he was experiencing a few
frustrations in some areas of his life and had not been involved in the same intense outdoor activity.
Just by making this change and getting back into a strong physiology, he was able to restore the
certainty and flow of his creativity immediately. You and I have the capacity to make changes like this
at any time. Just by changing our physiology, we can change our level of performance. Our capability
is always there, and what we've got to do is put ourselves into states where it is accessible.
The key to success, then, is to create patterns of movement that create confidence, a sense of
strength, flexibility, a sense of personal power, and fun. Realize that stagnation comes from lack of
movement. Can you think of an old person, someone who doesn't "get around much anymore"?
Getting old is not a matter of age; it's a lack of movement. And the ultimate lack of movement is
death. If you see children walking along the sidewalk after a rain, and there's a puddle in front of them,
what are they going to do when they get to that puddle? They're going to jump in! They're going to
laugh, splash around, and have a good time. What does an older person do? Walk around it? No, they
won't just walk around it—they'll complain the whole time! You want to live differently. You want to
live with a spring in your step, a smile on your face. Why not make cheerfulness, outrageousness,
playfulness a new priority for yourself? Make feeling good your expectation.
You don't have to have a reason to feel good—you're alive; you can feel good/or no reason at all!

FOCUS: THE POWER OF CONCENTRATION
If you wanted to, couldn't you get depressed at a moment's notice? You bet you could, just by focusing
on something in your past that was horrible. We all have some experience in our past that's pretty bad,
don t we? If you focus on it enough, and you picture it and think about it, pretty soon you'll start to
feel it. Have you ever gone to an awful movie?
Would you go back to that awful movie hundreds of times? Of course not. Why? Because it
wouldn't/eel good to do this! Then why would you go back to the awful movies in your head on a
regular basis? Why watch yourself in your least favorite roles, playing against your least favorite
leading lady or man? Why play out business disasters or bad career decisions again and again? Of
course, these "B" movies are not limited only to your past experience. You can focus on something
right now that you think you're missing out on, and feel bad. Better yet, you can focus on something
that hasn't even happened yet, and feel bad about it in advance! Though you may laugh at this now,
unfortunately that's what most of us do day to day.
If you wanted to feel like you were in ecstasy right now, could you? You could do this just as easily.
Could you focus on or remember a time when you were in absolute, total ecstasy? Could you focus on
how your body felt? Could you remember it with such vivid detail that you are fully associated to those
feelings again? You bet you could. Or you could focus on things you're ecstatic about in your life right
now, on what you feel is great in your life. And again, you could focus on things that haven't
happened yet, and feel good about them in advance. This is the power that goals offer and why we'll
be focusing on them in Chapter 12.
WHATEVER WE FOCUS ON BECOMES OUR IDEA OF REALITY
The truth is that very few things are absolute. Usually, how you feel about things, and the meaning of
a particular experience, is all dependent upon your focus. Elizabeth, the woman with Multiple
Personality Disorder, had been in pain constantly. Her escape route was to create a new personality for
each incident that had to be handled emotionally. It allowed her to change her focus by seeing the
problem through "somebody else's" eyes. Yet she still felt pain even after integration. It wasn't until
she learned how to control her state by consciously changing her physiology and her focus that she
was able to take control of her life.
Focus is not true reality, because it's one view; it's only one perception of the way things really are.
Think of that view—the power of our focus—as being a camera lens. The camera lens shows only the
picture and angle of what you are focused on. Because of that, photographs you take can easily distort
reality, presenting only a small portion of the big picture.
Suppose you went to a party with your camera, and you sat in one comer, focused on a group of
people who were arguing. How would that party be represented? It would be pictured as an unpleasant,
frustrating party where no one had a good time and everyone was fighting. And it's important for us to
remember that how we represent things in our minds will determine how we feel. But what if you were
to focus your camera on another end of the room where people were laughing and telling jokes and
having a great time? It would be shown to have been the best party of all, with everyone getting along
famously!
This is why there is so much turmoil over "unauthorized" biographies: they are only one person's
perception of another's life. And often, this view is offered by people whose jealousy gives them a
vested interest in distorting things. The problem is, the biography's view is limited only to the author's
"camera angle," and we all know that cameras distort reality, that a close-up can make things look
bigger than they really are.
And when manipulated expertly, a camera can minimize or blur important parts of the reality. To
paraphrase Ralph Waldo Emerson, each of us sees in others what we carry in our own hearts.

MEANING IS OFTEN A MATTER OF FOCUS
If you've scheduled a business meeting, and someone is not there on time, how you feel is based
strictly on what you focus on. Do you represent in your mind that the reason they are not there is that
they don't care, or do you interpret it as their having great difficulties in getting to the meeting?
Whichever you focus on will definitely affect your emotions. What it you were upset with them, and the
real reason they were late is that they were fighting to get a better bid on the business proposal they
were bringing you? Remember, whatever we focus on will determine how we feel. Maybe we shouldn't
jump to conclusions; we should choose what to focus on very carefully.
Focus determines whether you perceive your reality as good or bad, whether you feel happy or sad. A
fantastic metaphor for the power of focus is racing cars—a real passion for me. Driving a Formula race
car can sometimes make flying a jet helicopter seem like a very relaxing experience! In a race car you
cannot allow your focus to wander even for a moment from your outcome. Your attention can't be
limited to where you are; neither can it be stuck in the past or fixed too far in the future. While
remaining fully aware of where you are, you have to be anticipating what's about to happen in the
near future.
This was one of the first lessons I learned when I started racing school. The instructors put me in
what's called a "skid car"—an auto-mobile that has a computer built into it with hydraulic lifts that can
pull any wheel off the ground on a moment's signal from the instructor. The number-one fundamental
they teach in driving is: Focus on where you want to go, not on what you fear.
If you start to skid out of control, the tendency, of course, is to look at the wall. But if you keep
focusing on it, that's exactly where you'll end up. Drivers know that you go where you look; you travel
in the direction of your focus. If you resist your fear, have faith, and focus on where you want to go,
your actions will take you in that direction, and if it's possible to turn out of it, you will—but you stand
no chance if you focus on what you fear. Invariably people say, "What if you're going to crash
anyway?"
The answer is that you increase your chances by focusing on what you want. Focusing on the solution
is always to your benefit. If you have too much momentum in the direction of the wall, then focusing
on the problem just before the crash is not going to help you anyway.
When the instructors first explained this to me, I nodded my head and thought, "Of course! I know all
about this. After all, I teach this stuff." My first time out on the road I was screaming along, and all of
a sudden, unbeknownst to me, they pushed the button. I started to skid out of control. Where do you
think my eyes went? You bet! Right at the wall! In the final seconds, I was terrified because I knew I
was going to hit it. The instructor grabbed my head and yanked it to the left, forcing me to look in the
direction I needed to go. We kept skidding, and I knew we were going to crash, but I was forced to
look only in the direction I wanted to go. Sure enough, as I looked in that direction, I couldn't help but
turn the wheel accordingly. It caught at the last moment, and we pulled out. You can imagine my relief.
One thing that's useful to know about all of this: when you change your focus, often you don't
immediately change direction. Isn't that true in life as well? Often there's a lag time between when you
redirect your focus and when your body and your life's experience catch up. That's all the more reason
to start focusing on what you want quicker and not wait any longer with the problem.
Did I learn my lesson? No. I'd had an experience, but I had not created a strong enough neuroassociation. I had to condition in the new pattern. So sure enough, the next time I headed for the wall,
the instructor had to loudly remind me to look at my goal. On the third time, though, I turned my head
deliberately and consciously. I trusted it, and it worked. After doing it enough times, now when I go
into a skid, wham! my head goes where I want it to go, the wheel turns, and my car follows.
Does this guarantee I'll always succeed by controlling my focus? No. Does it increase my chances? One
hundredfold! The same thing is true in life. In later chapters, you'll learn some ways to make sure you
condition your focus to be positive. For now, realize that you've got to discipline your mind. A mind out
of control will play tricks on you. Directed, it's your greatest friend.
"Ask and you will receive. Seek and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you."
MATTHEW 7:7
The most powerful way to control focus is through the use of questions. For whatever you ask, your
brain provides an answer; whatever you look for, you'll find. If you ask, "Why is this person taking
advantage of me?" you're going to focus on how you're being taken advantage of, whether it's true or
not. If you ask, "How can I turn this around?" you'll get a more empowering answer. Questions are
such a powerful tool for changing your life, I've reserved the next chapter to talk exclusively about
them.
They are one of the most powerful and simple ways to change the way you're feeling about virtually
anything, and thus change the direction of your life at a moment's notice. Questions provide the key to
unlocking our unlimited potential.
One of the best illustrations of this is the story of a young man who grew up in Alabama. About fifteen
years ago, a seventh-grade bully picked a fight with him, punched him in the nose and knocked him
out. When the boy regained consciousness, he vowed65 to get revenge and kill the bully. He went
home, grabbed his mother's .22, and set out to find his target. In a matter of moments, his destiny
hung in the balance. With the bully in his gun sight, he could simply fire and his schoolmate would be
history. But at that very instant, he asked himself a question: What will happen to me if I pull the
trigger? And another image came into focus: a picture as painful as any imaginable. In that split
second which would take the boy's life in one of two very different directions, he visualized, with
chilling clarity, what it would be like to go to jail. He pictured having to stay up all night to keep the
other prisoners from raping him. That potential pain was greater than the anticipation of revenge. He
rearmed his gun, and shot a tree.
This boy was Bo Jackson, and as he describes this scene in his biography, there's no question that at
that pivot point in his life, the pain associated with prison was a force more powerful than the pleasure
of satisfaction he thought killing the other boy would bring. One change in focus, one decision about
pain and pleasure, probably made the difference between a kid with no future and one of the greatest
athletic success stories of our time.
"As the fletcher whittles and makes straight his arrows, so the master directs his straying thoughts."
THE BUDDHA

IT'S NOT ONLY WHAT YOU FOCUS ON BUT HOW . . .
Our experience of the world is created by gathering information through the use of our five senses.
However, each of us tends to develop a favorite mode of focus, or a modality, as it is often called.
Some people are more impacted, for example, by what they see; their visual system tends to be

65
vow 1. Gelöbnis; Gelübde; take a vow, make a vow ein Gelöbnis oder Gelübde ablegen; 2. geloben, schwören
(to do zu tun)
more dominant. For others, sounds are the trigger for the greatest of life's experiences, while for still
others, feelings are the foundation.
Even within each of these modes of experience, though, there are specific elements of pictures, sounds,
or other sensations that can be changed in order to increase or decrease the intensity of our
experience.
These foundational ingredients are called submodalities.* For example, you can make a picture in your
mind and then take any aspect of that image (a submodality), and change it to change your feelings
about it. You can brighten the picture, immediately changing the amount of intensity you feel about
the experience. This is known as changing a submodality. Probably the greatest expert in
submodalities is Richard Bandler, co-founder of Neuro-Linguistic Programming. The lineage of experts
on this dates back to the foundational work on the five senses done by Aristotle, which categorizes
perception models. You can radically raise or lower your intensity of feeling about anything by
manipulating submodalities. They affect how you feel about virtually anything, whether you feel joy,
frustration, wonder, or despair. Understanding them enables you to not only change how you feel
about any experience in your life, but to change what it means to you and thus what you can do about
it.
One image I've found very useful is to think of submodalities as the grocery store UPC bar codes,
those clusters of little black lines that have replaced price tags in just about every supermarket you
patronize today.
The codes look insignificant, yet when pulled across the checkout scanner, they tell the computer what
the item is, how much it costs, how its sale affects the inventory, and so on. Submodalities work the
same way.
When pulled across the scanner of the computer we call the brain, they tell the brain what this thing is,
how to feel about it, and what to do. You have your own bar codes, and there is a list of them coming
up along with questions to ask to determine which of them you use.
For example, if you tend to focus upon your visual modalities, the amount of enjoyment you get from a
particular memory is probably a direct consequence of the submodalities of size, color, brightness,
distance, and amount of movement in the visual image you've made of it. If you represent it to
yourself with auditory submodalities, then how you feel depends on the volume, tempo, pitch, tonality,
and other such factors you attach to it. For example, in order for some people to feel motivated, they
have to tune in a certain channel first. If their favorite channel is visual, then focusing on the visual
elements of a situation gives them more emotional intensity about it. For other people it's the auditory
or kinesthetic channels. And for some, the best strategy works like a combination lock. First the visual
lock has to be aligned, then the auditory, then the kinesthetic. All three dials have to be lined up in the
right place and the right order for the vault to open.
Once you're aware of this, you'll realize that people are constantly using words in their day-to-day
language to tell you which system and which submodalities they are tuning in. Listen to the ways they
describe their experience, and take it literally. (For example, in the last two sentences I used the terms
"tuning in" and "listen"—clearly these are auditory examples.)
How many times have you heard someone say, "I can't picture doing that"? They're telling you what
the problem is: if they did picture doing it, they'd go into a state where they'd feel like they could
make it happen.
Someone may have once said to you, "You're blowing things out of proportion." If you're really upset,
they may be right. You may be taking images in your mind and making them much bigger, which
tends to intensify the experience. If someone says, "This is weighing heavily upon me," you can assist
them by helping them feel lighter about the situation and thereby get them in a better state to deal
with it. If someone says, "I'm just tuning you guys out," you've got to get them to tune back in so
they can change states. Our ability to change the way we feel depends upon our ability to change our
submodalities. We must learn to take control of the various elements with which we represent
experiences and change them in ways that support our outcomes. For example, have you ever found
yourself saying you need to "get distance" from a problem? I'd like you to try something, if you would.
Think of a situation that is challenging you currently. Make a picture of it in your mind, then imagine
pushing that picture farther and farther away from yourself. Stand above it and look down upon the
problem with a new perspective. What happens to your emotional intensity? For most people, it drops.
What if the image becomes dimmer, or smaller? Now take the picture of the problem and make it
bigger, brighter, and closer. For most people, this intensifies it. Push it back out and watch the sun
melt it. A simple change in any one of these elements is like changing the ingredients in a recipe.
They're definitely going to alter what you finally experience in your body, Although I spoke about
submodalities in great depth in Unlimited Power,
I'm reviewing the topic here because I want to make sure you grasp this distinction. It's critical to
understanding much of the other work we'll be doing in this book. Remember, how you feel about
things is instantly changed by a shift in submodalities. For example, think of something that happened
yesterday. Just for a moment, picture that experience. Take the image of this memory and put it
behind you. Gradually push it back until it's miles behind you, a tiny, dim dot far off in the darkness.
Does it feel like it happened yesterday, or a long time ago? If the memory is great, bring it back.
Otherwise, leave it there! Who needs to focus on this memory? By contrast, you've had some
incredibly wonderful experiences in your life.
COMMON EXPRESSIONS BASED ON:
Visual Submodalities—
That really brightens my day.
That puts things in a better perspective.
That's a top priority.
This guy has a checkered past.
Let's look at the big picture.
This problem keeps staring me in the face.
Auditory Submodalities—
He's constantly giving me static about that.
The problem is screaming at me.
I hear you loud and clear.
It brought everything we were doing to a screeching
halt.
The guy is really offbeat.
That sounds great.
Kinesthetic Submodalities—
That guy is slimy.
The pressure's off/the pressure's on.
This thing is weighing on me.
I feel like I'm carrying this whole thing on my back.
This concert is really hot!
I'm absolutely immersed in this project.
Think of one right now, one that happened a long time ago. Recall the of that experience. Bring it
forward; put it in front of you. Make right, and colorful; make it three-dimensional. Step into your
body were then and feel that experience right now as if you were there. Does it feel like it happened a
long time ago, or is it something you are enjoying now? You see, even your experience of time can be
changed by changing Submodalities.

CREATE YOUR OWN BLUEPRINT
Discovering your Submodalities is a fun process. You may want to do this on your own, although you
may find it more fun to do with someone else. This will help with the accuracy, and if they're also
reading this book, you'll have a lot to talk about and a partner in your commitment to personal
mastery. So very quickly now, think of a time in your life when you had a very enjoyable experience,
and do the following: Rate your enjoyment on a scale from 0-100, where 0 is no enjoyment at all and
100 is the peak level of enjoyment you could possibly experience. Let's say you came up with 80 on
this emotional intensity scale. Now, go to the Checklist of Possible Submodalities (page 169), and let's
discover which elements are apt to create more enjoyment in your life than others, more pleasure
feelings than pain feelings. Begin to evaluate each of the questions contained in the checklist against
your experience. So, for example, as you remember this experience and focus on the visual
Submodalities, ask yourself, "Is it a movie or a still frame?" If it's a movie, notice how it feels. Does it
feel good?
Now, change it to its opposite. Make it a still frame and see what happens. Does your level of
enjoyment drop? Does it drop significantly? By what percentage? As you made it a still frame, did it
drop from 80 to 50, for example? Write down the impact that this change has made so you'll
be able to utilize this distinction in the future.
Then, return the imagery to its initial form; that is, make it a movie again if that's what it was, so you
feel like you're back at 80 again. Then go to the next question on your checklist. Is it in color or in
black and white? If it was in black and white, notice how that feels. Now, again, do the opposite to it.
Add color and see what happens. Does it raise your emotional intensity higher than 80? Write down
the impact this has upon you emotionally. If it brings you to a 95, this might be a valuable thing to
remember in the future. For example, when thinking about a task you usually avoid, if you add color to
your image of it, you'll find that your positive emotional intensity grows immediately. Now drop the
image back down to black and white, and again, notice what happens to your emotional intensity and
what a big difference this makes. Remember to always finish by restoring the original state before
going on to the next question. Put the color back into it; make it brighter than it was before, until
you're virtually awash in vivid color.
In tact, brightness is an important submodality for most people; brightening things intensifies their
emotion. If you think about the pleasurable experience right now, and make the image brighter and
brighter, you probably feel better, don't you? (Of course, there are exceptions. If you're savoring the
memory of a romantic moment, and suddenly turn all the lights on full blast, that may not be entirely
appropriate.) What if you were to make the image dim, dark, and defocused? For most people, that
makes it almost depressing. So make it brighter again; make it brilliant!

CHECKLIST OF POSSIBLE SUBMODALITIES
Visual
1. Movie/still
2. Color/black-and-white
3. Right/left/center
4. Up/middle/down
5. Bright/dim/dark
6. Lifesize/bigger/smaller
7. Proximity
8. Fast/medium/slow
9. Specific focus?
10. In picture
11. Frame/panorama
12. 3D/2D
13. Particular color
14. Viewpoint
15. Special trigsger
Auditory
1. Self/others
2. Content
3. How it's said
4. Volume
5. Tonality
6. Tempo
7. Location
8. Harmony/cacophony
9. Regular/irregular
10. Inflection
11. Certain words
12. Duration
13. Uniqueness
14. Special trigger
Kinesthetic
1. Temperature change
8. Texture change
3. Rigid/flexible
4. Vibration
5. Pressure
6. Location of pressure
7. Tension/relaxation
8. Movement/direction/
9. Breathing
10. Weight
11. Steady/intermittent
12. Size/shape change
13. Direction
14. Special trigger
Is it a movie or a still frame?
Is it color or black-and-white?
Is the image on the right, left, or center?
Is the image up, middle, or down?
Is the image bright, dim, or dark?
Is the image lifesize, bigger, or smaller?
How close is the image to you?
Is the speed of the image fast, medium, or slow?
Particular element focused on consistently?
Are you in the picture or watching from a distance?
Does the image have a frame or is it a panorama?
Is it three-dimensional or two-dimensional?
Is there a color that impacts you most?
Are you looking down on it, up, from side, etc.?
Anything else that triggers strong feelings?
Are you saying something to yourself or hearing it from
others?
What specifically do you say or hear?
How do you say or hear it?
How loud is it?
What is the tonality?
How fast is it?
Where is the sound coming from?
Is the sound in harmony or cacophonous?
Is the sound regular or irregular?
Is there inflection in the voice?
Are certain words emphasized?
How long did the sound last?
What is unique about the sound?
Anything else that triggers strong feelings?
Was there a temperature change? Hot or cold?
Was there a texture change? Rough or smooth?
Is it rigid or flexible?
Is there vibration?
Was there an increase or decrease in pressure?
Where was the pressure located?
Was there an increase in tension or relaxation?
Was there movement? If so, what was the direction
and speed?
Quality of breathing? Where did it start/end?
Is it heavy or light?
Are the feelings steady or intermittent?
Did it change size or shape?
Were feelings coming into body or going out?
Anything else that triggers strong feelings?
Continue down your list, noting which of these visual submodalities changes your emotional intensity
the most. Then focus on the auditory submodalities. As you re-create the experience inside your head,
how does it sound to you? What does raising the volume do to the level of pleasure you feel? How
does increasing the tempo affect your enjoyment?
By how much? Write it down, and shift as many other elements as you can think of. If what you're
imagining is the sound of someone's voice, experiment with different inflections and accents, and
notice what that does to the level of enjoyment you experience. If you change the quality of the sound
from smooth and silky to rough and gravelly, what happens? Remember, finish by restoring the sounds
to their original auditory form so that all the qualities continue to create pleasure for you.
Finally, focus on kinesthetic submodalities. As you remember this pleasurable experience, how does
changing the various kinesthetic elements intensify or decrease your pleasure? Does raising the
temperature make you feel more comfortable, or does it drive you up the wall? Focus on your
breathing. Where are you breathing from? If you change the quality of your breaths from rapid and
shallow to long and deep, how does this affect the quality of your experience? Notice what a difference
this makes, and write it down. What about the texture of the image? Play around with it; change it
from soft and fluffy, to wet and slimy, to gooey and sticky.
As you go through each of these changes, how does your body feel? Write it down. When you're done
experimenting with the whole checklist of submodalities, go back and adjust until the most pleasurable
image re-emerges; make it real enough so you can get your hands around it and squeeze the juice
from it!
As you go through these exercises, you will quickly see that some of these submodalities are much
more powerful for you than others. We're all made differently and have our own preferred ways of
representing our experiences to ourselves. What you've just done was to create a blueprint that maps
out how your brain is wired. Keep it and use it; it will come in handy some day—maybe today! By
knowing which submodalities trigger you, you'll know how to increase your positive emotions and
decrease your negative emotions.
For example, if you know that making something big and bright and bringing it close can tremendously
intensify your emotion, you can get yourself motivated to do something by changing its imagery to
match these criteria. You'll also know not to make your problems big, bright and close, or you'll
intensify your negative emotions as well! You'll know how to instantly shake yourself out of a limiting
state and into an energizing, empowering one. And you can be better equipped to continue your
pathway to personal power.
Knowing the large part that submodalities play in your experience of reality is crucial in meeting
challenges. For example, whether you feel confused or on track is a matter of submodalities. If you
think about a time when you felt confused, remember whether you were representing the experience
as a picture or a movie. Then compare it to a time when you felt that you understood something.
Often when people feel confused, it's because they have a series of images in their heads that are
piled up too closely together in a chaotic jumble because someone has been talking too rapidly or
loudly. For other people, they get confused if things are taught to them too slowly. These individuals
need to see images in movie form, to see how things relate to each other; otherwise the process is too
disassociated. Do you see how understanding someone's submodalities can help you to teach them
much more effectively?
The challenge is that most of us take our limiting patterns and make them big, bright, close, loud, or
heavy—whichever submodalities we're most attuned to—and then wonder why we feel overwhelmed' If
you've ever pulled yourself out of that state, it's probably because you or somebody else took that
image and changed it, redirecting your focus. You finally said, "Oh, it's not that big a deal." Or you
worked on one aspect of it, and by doing so, it didn't seem like such a big project to tackle. These are
all simple strategies, many of which I laid out in Unlimited Power. In this chapter, I'm expecting to
whet your appetite and make you aware of them.
CHANGE YOUR STATES AND YOU CHANGE YOUR LIFE
You can now change your state in so many ways, and they're all so simple. You can change your
physiology immediately just by changing your breathing. You can change your focus by deciding what
to focus on, or the order of things you focus on, or how you do it. You can change your submodalities.
If you've been consistently focusing on the worst that could happen, there's no excuse for continuing
to do that. Start now to focus on the best.
The key in life is to have so many ways to direct your life that it becomes an art. The challenge for
most people is that they have only a few ways to change their state: they overeat, over drink,
oversleep, over shop, smoke, or take a drug—none of which empower us, and all of which can have
disastrous and tragic consequences. The biggest problem is that many of these consequences are
cumulative, so we don't even notice the danger until it's too late. That's what happened to Elvis
Presley, and that, unfortunately, is also what's happening every day to so many other people. Picture
an unfortunate frog in a kettle being slowly simmered to death. If he had been dropped into a fully
boiling pot, the shock of the heat would have caused him to jump back out immediately—but with the
heat slowly building, he never notices he's in danger until it's too late to get out. The journey toward
Niagara Falls begins when you don't control your states, because if you don't control your states, you
won't be able to control your behavior. If there are things you need to accomplish but you can't get
motivated, realize you're not in the appropriate state. That's not an excuse, though, that's a command!
It's a command to do whatever it takes to change your state, whether it's changing your physiology or
your focus. At one time, I put myself in a state of being pressured to write my book; no wonder I felt it
was impossible! But then I had to find a way to change my state; otherwise, you wouldn't be reading
this today. I had to be in a state of creativity, a state of excitement. If you want to go on a diet, it's
not going to work if you're in a fearful state, or a worried state, or a frustrated state. You've got to be
in a determined state in order to succeed. Or, if you want to perform better on your job, realize that
intelligence is often a factor of state. People who supposedly have limited capability will find their
talent shooting through the roof if they get into a new state. I've demonstrated this many times with
dyslexic people.
While dyslexia is a function of our visual faculties, it's also a function of our mental and emotional
states. People who are dyslexic do not reverse letters or words every time they read something. They
may do it most of the time, but they don't do it all of the time. The difference between when they're
able to read clearly and when they reverse letters all comes down to state. If you change their state,
you immediately change their performance. Anyone who's dyslexic or has any other state-based
challenge can use these strategies to turn themselves around.
Since movement can instantly change how we feel, it makes sense for us to create lots of ways to
change our state with one, singular movement in an instant. One of the things that most powerfully
changed my life was something I first learned years ago. In Canada I found a man who was breaking
wood karate-style. Instead of spending a year and a half to two years to learn to do it, with no martial
arts training, I simply found out what he was focusing on, how he was focusing (the brightness and so
on) in his head, what his beliefs were, and what his physical strategy was—how he specifically used
his body to break the wood.
I practiced over and over his physical movements identically with tremendous emotional intensity,
sending my brain deep sensations of certainty. And all the while, my instructor coached me on my
movements. Barn! I broke through one piece of wood, then two pieces, then three pieces, then four.
What had I done to accomplish this? 1)1 raised my standards and made breaking the wood a must—
something I previously would have accepted as a limitation; 2) I changed my limiting belief about my
ability to do this by changing my emotional state into one of certainty, and 3) I modeled an effective
strategy for producing the result.
This act transformed my sense of power and certainty throughout my whole body. I began to use this
same "wood breaking" sense of certainty to accomplish other things I never thought I could do,
breaking through my procrastination and some of my fears easily. Over the years I continued to use
and reinforce these sensations, and I began to teach them to others, even children, eleven- and
twelve-year-old girls, showing them how to increase their self-esteem by giving them an experience
they didn't think was possible. I eventually started using this as part of my video-based Unlimited
Power seminars, conducted by my franchisees, our Personal Development Consultants around the
world.
Often in 30 minutes or less they are able to help their participants to overcome their fears and learn
how to break through anything that stops them in their lives. After breaking the wood, they learn to
use this experience to give themselves the sense of certainty that is necessary in pursuing anything
they want to achieve in life. It's always fascinating to see a huge man who thinks he can do it with just
brute force get up there and miss, and then watch a woman half his size and muscular tone break
through in a heartbeat because she's developed the certainty in her physiology.
"Experience is not what happens to a man; it is what a man does with what happens to him."
ALDOUS HUXLEY
You've got to realize that you must take conscious control of running your own mind. You've got to do
it deliberately; otherwise, you're going to be at the mercy of whatever happens around you. The first
skill you must master is to be able to change your state instantly no matter what the environment, no
matter how scared or frustrated you are. This is one of the foundational skills people develop in my
seminars. They learn how to quickly change their state from being afraid and "knowing" they can't do
something, to knowing they can do it and being able to take effective action. Developing experiences
like this in which you change quickly gives you tremendous power in your life—something you can't
fully appreciate until you really try it for yourself.
The second skill is that you should be able to change state consistently in any environment—maybe in
an environment that used to make you uncomfortable, but in which you can now change your state
time and again, conditioning yourself until you feel good no matter where you are. The third skill, of
course, is to establish a set of habitual patterns of using your physiology and focus so that you
consistently feel good without any conscious effort whatsoever. My definition of success is to live your
life in a way that causes you to feel tons of pleasure and very little pain—and because of your lifestyle,
have the people around you feel a lot more pleasure than they do pain. Someone who's achieved a lot
but is living in emotional pain all the time, or is surrounded by people in pain all the time, isn't truly
successful. The fourth goal is to enable others to change their state instantly, to change their state in
any environment, and to change their state for their whole life. This is what my franchisees learn to be
able to do in their seminars and in their one-on-one work with people.
So, what do you need to remember from this chapter? All that you really want in life is to change how
you feel. Again, all your emotions are nothing but biochemical storms in your brain, and you are in
control of them at any moment in time. You can feel ecstasy right now, or you can feel pain or
depression or overwhelmed—it's all up to you. You don't need drugs or anything else to do it. There
are much more effective ways and, as you learned in the chapter on beliefs, drugs can be overpowered
by the chemicals you create in your own body, by changing your focus and the way you're using your
physiology. These chemicals are much more powerful than virtually any outside substance.
"Every great and commanding moment in the annals of the world is the triumph of some enthusiasm."
RALPH WALDO EMERSON

DO YOU KNOW HOW TO MAKE YOURSELF FEEL GOOD?
On a business trip to Toronto, I felt physically stressed because of intense back pain; As the plane
descended, I began to think about what I needed to do when I got to my hotel. It would already be
10:30 p.m., and I had to be up early the next morning to conduct my seminar. I could eat
something—after all, I'd had nothing all day—but it was awfully late. I could do my paperwork and
watch the news. In that moment I realized all of these actions were merely strategies for getting out of
pain and into some level of pleasure. Yet none of them were all that compelling. I needed to expand
my list of ways to experience pleasure, regardless of the time or place.
So do you know how to make yourself feel good? This sounds like a stupid question, doesn't it? But
really, do you have a set of specific and empowering ways to make yourself feel good at a moment's
notice? Can you accomplish this without the use of food, alcohol, drugs, cigarettes, or other addictive
sources? I'm sure you have a few, but let's expand the list. Right now, let's identify some of the
positive choices you already have for making yourself feel good. Sit down right now and write down a
list of things that you currently do to change how you feel. As long as you're making a list, why not
add some new things you may not have tried before that could positively change your state as well?
Don't stop until you have a minimum of fifteen ways to instantly feel good, and the ideal would be at
least twenty-five. This is an exercise you may want to come back to again until you have hundreds of
ways! When I made a list for myself, I realized that playing music was one of the most powerful ways I
could change my state quickly. Reading was another way to feel good because it changed my focus,
and I love to learn—especially reading something instructional and informational, something I can
immediately apply to my life. Changing my body movements is something I can do instantly to break
out of a limiting state and into a resourceful one: exercising on my StairMaster™ with the music
cranking full tilt, jumping up and down on my rebounder unit, running five miles uphill, swimming laps.
Here are some others: dancing, singing along with my favorite CDs, watching a comedy film, going to
a concert, listening to informational audio tapes. Taking a Jacuzzi, a warm bath. Making love with my
wife. Having a family dinner where we all sit down at the table and chat about what's most important
to us. Hugging and kissing my children, hugging and kissing Becky. Taking Becky to a movie like Ghost
where we sit in our seats, in puddles of tears. Creating a new idea, a new company, a new concept.
Refining or improving anything that I'm currently doing. Creating anything. Telling jokes to friends.
Doing anything that makes me feel like I'm contributing. Conducting any of my seminars, especially
huge ones (one of my favorite submodalities). Polishing up my memories, vividly remembering a
wonderful experience I've had recently or in the past within my journal.
1.

_____________________________________________________________

2.

_____________________________________________________________

3.

_____________________________________________________________

4.

_____________________________________________________________

5.

_____________________________________________________________

6.

_____________________________________________________________

7.

_____________________________________________________________

8.

_____________________________________________________________

9.

_____________________________________________________________

10. _____________________________________________________________
11. _____________________________________________________________
12. _____________________________________________________________
13. _____________________________________________________________
14. _____________________________________________________________
15. _____________________________________________________________
16. _____________________________________________________________
17. _____________________________________________________________
18. _____________________________________________________________
19. _____________________________________________________________
20. _____________________________________________________________
21. _____________________________________________________________
22. _____________________________________________________________
23. _____________________________________________________________
24. _____________________________________________________________
25. _____________________________________________________________
IF YOU DON'T HAVE A PLAN FOR PLEASURE, YOU WILL HAVE PAIN
The whole key here is to create a huge list of ways to make yourself feel good so you don't need to
turn to those other ways that are destructive. If you link pain to the destructive habits and more and
more pleasure to these new empowering ones, you'll find that most of them are accessible most of the
time. Make this list a reality; develop a plan for pleasure for each and every day. Don't just randomly
hope that pleasure will somehow show up; set yourself up for ecstasy. Make room for it! What we're
talking about, again, is conditioning your nervous sys- tem, your body, and your mental focus so that
it searches constantly to see how everything in your life benefits you. Just remember that if you
continue to have a limiting emotional pattern, it's because you are using your body in a habitual way,
or are continuing to focus in a certain disempowering way. If it's your focus that needs to be shifted,
there is one incredible tool that can change it instantly. You must know that.. .
8
QUESTIONS ARE THE ANSWER
"He who asks questions cannot avoid the answers."
CAMEROON PROVERB
They needed no reason. They came simply because he was of Jewish descent. The Nazis stormed into
his home, arresting him and his entire family. Soon they were herded like cattle, packed into a train,
and then sent to a death camp in Krakow. His most disturbing nightmares could never have prepared
him for seeing his family shot before his very eyes. How could he live through the horror of seeing his
child's clothing on another because his son was now dead as the result of a "shower"?
Somehow he continued. One day he looked at the nightmare around him and confronted an
inescapable truth: if he stayed there even one more day, he would surely die. He made a decision that
he must escape and that escape must happen immediately! He knew not how, he simply knew he must.
For weeks he'd asked the other prisoners, "How can we escape this horrible place?" The answers he
received seemed always to be the same: "Don't be a fool," they said, "there is no escape! Asking such
questions will only torture your soul.
Just work hard and pray you survive." But he couldn't accept this—he wouldn't accept it. He became
obsessed with escape, and even when his answers didn't make any sense, he kept asking over and
over again, "How can I do it? There must be a way. How can I get out of here
healthy, alive, today?"
It is said that if you ask, you shall receive. And for some reason, on this day he got his answer.
Perhaps it was the intensity with which he asked his question, or maybe it was his sense of certainty
that "now is the time." Or possibly it was just the impact of continually focusing on the answer to one
burning question. For whatever reason, the giant power of the human mind and spirit awakened in this
man. The answer came to him through an unlikely source: the sickening smell of decaying human flesh.
There, only a few feet from his work, he saw a huge pile of bodies that had been shoveled into the
back of a truck—men, women, and children who had been gassed. The gold fillings had been pulled
from their teeth; everything that they owned—any jewelry—-even their clothing, had been taken.
Instead of asking, "How could the Nazis be so despicable, so destructive? How could God make
something so evil? Why has God done this to me?," Stanislavsky Lech asked a different question. He
asked, "How can I use this to escape?" And instantly he got his answer.
As the end of the day neared and the work party headed back into the barracks, Lech ducked behind
the truck. In a heartbeat, he ripped off his clothes and dove naked into the pile of bodies while no one
was looking.
He pretended that he was dead, remaining totally still even though later he was almost crushed as
more and more bodies were heaped on top of him.
The fetid smell of rotting flesh, the rigid remains of the dead surrounded him everywhere. He waited
and waited, hoping that no one would notice the one living body in that pile of death, hoping that
sooner or later the truck would drive off.
Finally, he heard the sound of the engine starting. He felt the truck shudder. And in that moment, he
felt a stirring of hope as he lay among the dead. Eventually, he felt the truck lurch to a stop, and then
it dumped its ghastly cargo—dozens of the dead and one man pretending to be one of them—in a giant
open grave outside the camp. Lech remained there for hours until nightfall. When he finally felt certain
no one was there, he extracted himself from the mountain of cadavers, and he ran naked twenty-five
miles to freedom.
What was the difference between Stanislavsky Lech and so many others who perished in the
concentration camps? While, of course, there were many factors, one critical difference was that he
asked a different question. He asked persistently, he asked with expectation of receiving an answer,
and his brain came up with a solution that saved his life. The questions he asked himself that day in
Krakow caused him to make split-second decisions that led to actions that significantly impacted his
destiny. But before he could get the answer, make the decisions, and take those actions, he had to ask
himself the right questions.
Throughout this book you've learned how our beliefs affect our decisions, our actions, the direction of
our lives, and therefore our ultimate destiny. But all these influences are a product of thinking—of the
way your brain has evaluated and created meaning throughout your entire life. So to get to the bottom
of how we create our reality on a daily basis we need to answer the question, "Just how do we think?"

OUR QUESTIONS DETERMINE OUR THOUGHTS
One day, I was thinking about important events in my own life and in the lives of people I had
encountered along the way. I had met so many people, fortunate and unfortunate, successful and
unsuccessful; I really wanted to know what allowed successful people to achieve great things,
while others with similar or better backgrounds disappeared over the tails of Niagara. So I asked
myself, "What really makes the biggest difference in my life, in who I become, in who I am as a person,
and in where I am going?" The answer I came up with was one I've already shared with you. "It's not
the events that shape my life that determine how I feel and act, but, rather, it's the way I interpret
and evaluate my life experiences. The meaning I attach to an event will determine the decisions I
make, the actions I take, and therefore my ultimate destiny. But," I asked myself, "how do I go about
evaluating? What exactly is an evaluation?"
I thought, "Well, right now I'm evaluating, aren't I? I'm trying to evaluate how to describe what an
evaluation is. What am I doing right now?" And then I realized I had just been asking myself a series
of questions, and obviously those questions were:
How do I go about evaluating?
What exactly is an evaluation?
Right now I'm evaluating, aren't I?
What am I doing right now?
Then I thought, "Is it possible that evaluations are nothing but questions?" And I started laughing and
thought, "Well, isn't that a question?"
I began to realize that thinking itself is nothing but the process of asking and answering questions. If
after reading this you're thinking,
"That's true," or "That's not true," you had to ask yourself—either consciously or unconsciously—a
question, and that question was, "Is this true?" Or even if you thought, "I need to think about that,"
what you're really saying is, "1 need to ask myself some questions about that. I need to consider that
for a moment." As you consider it, you'll begin to question it. We need to realize that most of what we
do, day in and day out, is ask and answer questions. So if we want to change the quality of our lives,
we should change our habitual questions. These questions direct our focus, and therefore how we think
and how we feel.
The masters of question asking, of course, are kids. How many millions of questions do they constantly
bombard us with as they're growing up? Why do you think that is? Is it just to drive us crazy? We need
to realize that they're constantly making evaluations as to what things mean and what they should do.
They're starting to create neuro-associations that will guide their futures. They're learning machines,
and the way to learn, to think, to make new connections, is initiated by questions—either questions we
ask of ourselves or others.
This entire book and my life's work is the result of my asking questions about what makes us all do
what we do and how we can produce change more quickly and easily than it has been done before.
Questions are the primary way that we learn virtually anything. In fact, the entire Socratic method (a
way of teaching that dates back to the ancient Greek philosopher Socrates) is based upon the teacher
doing nothing but asking questions, directing the students' focus, and getting them to come up with
their own answers.
When I realized the incredible power of questions to shape our thoughts and literally our every
response to our experiences, I went on a "quest for questions." I began to notice how often questions
appeared in our culture. Games like Trivial Pursuit, Jeopardy!, and Scruples were all the rage. The
Book of Questions—an entire book of nothing but questions to make you think about your life and your
values, was a bestseller.
Ads on TV and in print asked, "What becomes a legend most?" "How do you spell relief?" "Is it soup
yet?" Spike Lee asks Michael Jordan "Is it the shoes?" in a TV ad for Nike's Air Jordan basketball shoes.
I not only wanted to know what questions we were asking as a society, but I also wanted to discover
the questions that made a difference in people's lives. I asked people in my seminars, in airplanes, in
meetings; I asked everyone I met, from CEOs in high-rises to homeless people on the street, trying to
discover the questions that created their experience of day-to-day life. I realized that the main
difference between the people who seemed to be successful—in any area!—and those who weren't was
that successful people asked better questions, and as a result, they got better answers. They got
answers that empowered them to know exactly what to do in any situation to produce the results they
desired.
Quality questions create a quality life. You need to bum this idea into your brain, because it's as
important as anything else you'll learn in this book. Businesses succeed when those who make the
decisions that control their destiny ask the right questions about markets or strategies or product lines.
Relationships flourish when people ask the right questions about where potential conflicts exist and
how to support each other instead of tearing each other down. Politicians win elections when the
questions they raise—whether explicitly or implicitly—provide answers that work for them and their
community.
When the automobile was in its infancy, hundreds of people tinkered with building them, but Henry
Ford asked, "How can I mass-produce it?"
Millions chafed under communism, but Lech Walesa asked, "How can I raise the standard of living for
all working men and women?" Questions set off a processional effect that has an impact beyond our
imagination. Questioning our limitations is what tears down the walls in life—in business, in
relationships, between countries. I believe all human progress is preceded by new questions.

THE POWER OF QUESTIONS
"Some men see things as they are, and say, 'Why?' I dream of things that never were, and say, 'Why
not?'"
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
Most of us, when we see someone of extraordinary capability or someone who seems to have a
superhuman capacity to deal with life's challenges, think things like, "They're so lucky! They're so
talented! They must have been born that way." But in reality, the human brain has the capacity to
produce answers faster than the "smartest" computer on earth, even considering today's
microtechnology with computers that calculate in nanoseconds (billionths of a second). It would take
two buildings the size of the World Trade Center to house the storage capacity of your brain!
Yet this three-pound lump of gray matter can give you more firepower instantly for coming up with
solutions to challenges and creating powerful emotional sensations than anything in man's vast arsenal
of technology.
Just like a computer boasting tremendous capacity, without an understanding of how to retrieve and
utilize all that's been stored, the brain's capacity means nothing. I'm sure you've known someone
(maybe even yourself) who has purchased a new computer system and never used it simply because
he or she didn't figure out how. If you want access to the files of valuable information in a computer,
you must understand how to retrieve the data by asking for it with the proper commands. Likewise,
what enables you to get anything you want from your own personal databanks is the commanding
power of asking questions.
"Always the beautiful answer who asks a more beautiful question."
E. E. CUMMINGS
I'm here to tell you that the difference between people is the difference in the questions they ask
consistently. Some people are depressed on a regular basis. Why? As we revealed in the last chapter,
part of the problem is their limited states. They conduct their lives with limited movements and
hamstrung physiology, but more importantly, they focus on things that make them feel overloaded and
overwhelmed. Their pattern of focus and evaluation seriously limits their emotional experience of life.
Could this person change how they feel in a moment? You bet—just by changing mental focus.
So what's the quickest way to change focus? Simply by asking a new question. When people are
depressed, it is more than likely due to asking themselves disempowering questions on a regular basis,
questions like: "What's the use? Why even try, since things never seem to work out anyway? Why me,
Lord?" Remember, ask and you shall receive. If you ask a terrible question, you'll get a terrible answer.
Your mental computer is ever ready to serve you, and whatever question you give it, it will surely
come up with an answer. So if you ask, "Why can't I ever succeed?," it will tell you—even if it has to
make something up! It might come up with an answer like, "Because you're stupid," or "Because you
don't deserve to do well anyway."
Now, what's an example of brilliant questions? How about my good friend, W. Mitchell? If you read
Unlimited Power, you know his story. How do you think he was able to survive having two-thirds of his
body burned and still feel good about his life? How could he then endure an airplane accident years
later, lose the use of his legs, and be confined to a wheelchair—and still find a way to enjoy
contributing to others? He learned to control his focus by asking the right questions. When he found
himself in the hospital, with his body burned beyond recognition, and surrounded by a large number of
other patients in the ward who were feeling sorry for themselves, patients who were asking
themselves, "Why me? How could God do this to me? Why is life so unfair? What's the use of living as
a 'cripple'?," Mitchell chose instead to ask himself, "How can I use this? Because of this, what will I be
able to contribute to others?" These questions are what created the difference in destinies: "Why me?"
rarely produces a positive result, while "How can I use this?" usually leads us in the direction of turning
our difficulties into a driving force to make ourselves and the world better.
Mitchell realized that being hurt, angry, and frustrated wouldn't change his life, so instead of looking at
what he didn't have, he said to himself, "What do I still have? Who am I really? Am I really only my
body, or am I something more? What am I capable of now, even more so than before?" After his
airplane accident, while in the hospital and paralyzed from the waist down, he met an incredibly
attractive woman, a nurse named Annie. With his entire face burned off, his body paralyzed from the
waist down, he had the audacity to ask: "How could I get a date with her?" His buddies said, "You're
insane. You're deluding yourself." But a year and a half later, he and Annie were in a relationship, and
today she's his wife.
That's the beauty of asking empowering questions: they bring us an irreplaceable resource: answers
and solutions. Questions determine everything you do in life, from your abilities to your relationships
to your income. For example, many people fail to commit to a relationship simply because they keep
asking questions that create doubt: "What if there's somebody better out there? What if I commit
myself now and miss out?" What terribly disempowering questions! This fuels the fear that the grass
will always be greener on the other side of the fence, and it keeps you from being able to enjoy what
you already have in your own life. Sometimes these same people destroy the relationships they do
eventually have with more terrible questions: "How come you always do this to me? Why don't you
appreciate me? What if I were to leave right now—how would that make you feel?" Compare this
with "How did I get so lucky to have you in my life? What do I love the most about my husband/wife?
How much richer will our lives be as a result of our relationship?"
Think of the questions you habitually ask yourself in the area of finances. Invariably, if a person isn't
doing well financially, it's because they're creating a great deal of fear in their life—fear that keeps
them from investing or mastering their finances in the first place. They ask questions like "What toys
do I want right now?" instead of "What plan do I need in order to achieve my ultimate financial goals?"
The questions you ask will determine where you focus, how you think, how you feel, and what you do.
If we want to change our finances, we've got to hold ourselves to higher standards, change our beliefs
about what's possible, and develop a better strategy. One of the things that I've noticed in modeling
some of today's financial giants is that they consistently ask different questions than the masses—
questions that often run counter to even the most widely accepted financial "wisdom."
Currently, there is no denying that Donald Trump is experiencing financial challenges. For almost a
decade, though, he was clearly an economic kingpin. How did he do it? There were many factors, but
one that virtually everybody agrees on is that in the mid-seventies, when New York City faced
bankruptcy and most developers fretted over questions like "How will we survive if this city goes
under?," Trump asked a unique question: "How can I get rich while everyone else is afraid?" This one
question helped to shape many of his business decisions and clearly led him to the position of
economic dominance he enjoyed.
Trump didn't stop there. He also asked another great question, one which would be good to emulate
before making any financial investments. Once he was convinced that a project had tremendous
potential for economic gain, he would then ask, "What's the downside? What's the worst that can
happen, and can I handle it?" His belief was that if he knew he could handle the worst-case scenario,
then he should do the deal because the upside would take care of itself. So if he asked such shrewd
questions, what happened?
Trump had put deals together that no one else would have considered during those economically
stressful times. He had taken over the old Commodore building and turned it into the Grand Hyatt (his
first major economic success). And when the tide turned, he had won big. However, he eventually ran
into major economic trouble. Why? Many say he changed what he focused on in making investments.
He began to ask questions like "What can I enjoy owning?" instead of "What is the most profitable
deal?" Worse, some say Trump began to believe he was invincible, and as a result he stopped asking
his "downside" questions. This single change in his evaluation procedure—in the questions he was
asking himself—may have cost him a good part of his fortune. Remember, it's not only the questions
you ask, but the questions you/ail to ask, that shape your destiny.
If there's one thing I've learned in seeking out the core beliefs and strategies of today's leading minds,
it's that superior evaluations create a superior life. We all have the capacity to evaluate life at a level
that produces outstanding results. What do you think of when you hear the word "genius"? If you're
like me, what immediately comes to mind is a picture of Albert Einstein. But how did Einstein move
beyond his failed high school education into the realm of truly great thinkers? Undoubtedly, it was
because he asked supremely formulated questions.
As Einstein was first exploring the idea of time and space relativity, he asked, "Is it possible that things
that seem simultaneous are not really so?" For example, if you are a few miles away from a sonic
boom, do you hear it at the exact moment it occurs in space? Einstein conjectured that you do not,
that what you experience as happening in that moment is not really happening then, but rather
occurred only a moment ago. In day-to-day life, he reasoned, time is relative depending on how you
occupy your mind.
Einstein once said, "When a man sits with a pretty girl for an hour, it seems like a minute. But let him
sit on a hot stove for a minute and it's longer than any hour. That's relativity." He conjectured further
into the realm of physics, and believing that the speed of light is fixed, he found himself asking the
question, "What if you could put light aboard a rocket? Would its speed be increased then?" In the
process of answering these fascinating questions, and others like them, Einstein postulated his
renowned theory of relativity.
"The important thing is not to stop questioning.
Curiosity has its own reason for existing.
One cannot help but be in awe when he contemplates the mysteries of eternity, of life, of the
marvelous structure of reality.
It is enough if one tries merely to comprehend a little of this mystery every day.
Never lose a holy curiosity."
ALBERT EINSTEIN
The powerful distinctions that Einstein made resulted from a series of questions. Were they simple?
Yes. Were they powerful? Absolutely. What power could you unleash by asking some equally simple
but powerful questions? Questions are undeniably a magic tool that allows the genie in our minds to
meet our wishes; they are the wake-up call to our giant capacities. They allow us to achieve our
desires if only we present them in the form of a specific and well-thought-out request. A genuine
quality of life comes from consistent, quality questions. Remember, your brain, like the genie, will give
you whatever you ask of it. So be careful what you ask for—whatever you look for you'll find.
So with all this power between our ears, why aren't more people "happy, healthy, wealthy, and wise"?
Why are so many frustrated, feeling like there are no answers in their lives? One answer is that when
they ask questions, they lack the certainty that causes the answers to come to them, and most
importantly, they fail to consciously ask empowering questions of themselves. They run roughshod
over this critical process with no forethought or sensitivity to the power they are abusing or failing
to ignite by their lack of faith.
A classic example of this is a person who wants to lose weight and "can't." It's not that they can't: it's
that their present plan of evaluating what to eat is not supporting them. They ask questions like "What
would make me feel most full?" and "What is the sweetest, richest food I can get away with?" This
leads them to select foods filled with fat and sugar—a guarantee of more unhappiness. What if instead
they asked questions like "What would really nourish me?," "What's something light that I can eat
that would give me energy?," or "Will this cleanse or clog me?" Better yet, they could ask, "If I eat this,
what will I have to give up in order to still achieve my goals? What's the ultimate price I'll pay if I don't
stop this indulgence now?" By asking questions like this, they'll associate pain to overeating, and their
behavior will change immediately.
To change your life for the better, you must change your habitual questions. Remember, the patterns
of questions you consistently ask will create either enervation or enjoyment, indignation or inspiration,
misery or magic. Ask the questions that will uplift your spirit and push you along the path of human
excellence.

HOW QUESTIONS WORK
Questions accomplish three specific things:
1. Questions immediately change what we're focusing on and therefore how we feel. If you keep
asking questions like "How come I'm so depressed?" or "Why doesn't anybody like me?" you will focus
on, look for, and find references to back up the idea that there is a reason for you to feel depressed
and unloved. As a result, you'll stay in those unresourceful states. If instead you ask, "How can I
change my state so that I am feeling happy and am being more lovable?," you'll focus on solutions.
Even if your brain initially responds, "There's nothing I can do," but like Stanislavsky Lech or W.
Mitchell you persist with a sense of certainty and expectation in spite of it all, then eventually you will
get the answers you need and deserve. You will come up with authentic reasons for feeling better, and
as you focus on them, your emotional state will immediately follow suit.
There's a big difference between an affirmation and a question. When you say to yourself, "I'm happy;
I'm happy; I'm happy," this might cause you to feel happy if you produce enough emotional intensity,
change your physiology and therefore your state. But in reality, you can make affirmations all day long
and not really change how you feel. What will really change the way you feel is asking, "What am I
happy about now? What could I be happy about if I wanted to be? How would that make me feel?"
If you keep asking questions like this, you'll come up with real references that will make you begin to
focus on reasons that do in fact exist for you to feel happy. You'll feel certain that you're happy.
Instead of just "pumping you up," questions provide you with actual reasons to feel the emotion. You
and I can change how we feel in an instant, just by changing our focus. Most of us don't realize the
power of memory management. Isn't it true that you have treasured moments in your life that if all
you did was focus on them and think about them you'd immediately feel wonderful again in this
moment now? Perhaps it was the birth of a child, your wedding day, or your first date. Questions are
the guide to those moments. If you ask yourself questions like "What are my most treasured
memories?" or "What's really great in my life right now?" and you can seriously consider the question,
you'll start thinking of experiences that make you feel absolutely phenomenal. And in that phenomenal
emotional state, you'll not only feel better, but you'll be able to contribute more to those around you.
The challenge, as you may have guessed, is that most of us are on automatic pilot. By failing to
consciously control the habitual questions we ask, we severely limit our emotional range and thus our
ability to utilize the resources at hand. The solution? As we covered in Chapter 6, the first step is to
become aware of what you want and discover your old limiting pattern. Get leverage: ask yourself, "If
I don't change this, what is the ultimate price? What will this cost me in the long run?" and "How will
my whole life be transformed if I did this right now?"; interrupt the pattern (if you've ever felt pain,
then been distracted and not felt it, you know how effective this is); create a new, empowering
alternative with a set of better questions; and then condition them by rehearsing them until they
become a consistent part of your life.

A SKILL OF POWER
Learning to ask empowering questions in moments of crisis is a critical skill that has pulled me through
some of the toughest times in my life. I'll never forget the moment I discovered a former associate
doing a seminar and claiming credit for material I had developed, word for word. My first impulse was
to ask things like "How dare he! How could he have the nerve to do this?," but I soon realized that
getting involved in these kinds of unanswerable questions would only whip me into a frenzy, creating
an endless loop out of which there seemed no escape.
The guy did what he did—I realized I should simply allow my attorneys to apply the pain-pleasure
principle to straighten him out—so why should I have stayed in an angry state in the meantime? I
decided to move on and enjoy my life, but as long as I kept asking, "How could he do this to me?," I'd
remain in this negative state. The fastest way to change my state would be to ask a series of new
questions. So I asked myself, "What do I respect about this guy?" At first my brain screamed,
"Nothing!" but then I asked, "What could I respect about him if I wanted to?," and finally I came up
with an answer: "Well, I've got to admit that he's not sitting around passively; at least he's using what
I taught him!" This made me laugh and definitely broke my pattern, enabling me to change my state,
reassess my options, and feel good about their pursuit. One of the ways that I've discovered to
increase the quality of my life is to model the habitual questions of people I really respect. If you
find someone who's extremely happy, I can guarantee you that there is a reason. It is that this person
focuses consistently on things that make them happy, and this means that they're asking questions
about happiness. Find out their questions, use them, and you'll begin to feel the way they do.
Some questions we will simply not consider. Walt Disney, for instance, refused to entertain any
questions about whether his organizations could succeed or not. But that doesn't mean that the
creator of the Magic Kingdom did not use questions in more resourceful ways. My grandfather, Charles
Shows, was a writer with Disney before he went on to work with Hanna-Barbera developing such
cartoon characters as Yogi Bear and Huckleberry Hound. One of the things he shared with me was that
anytime they were working on a new project or script, Disney had a unique way of requesting input.
He designated a whole wall on which he would display the project, script, or idea, and everyone in the
company would come by and write down the answers to the question: "How can we improve this?"
They'd write solution after solution, covering the wall with suggestions. Then Disney would review
everyone's answers to the question he'd asked. In this way, Walt Disney accessed the resources of
every person in his company, and then produced results commensurate with that quality of input.
The answers we receive depend upon the questions we're willing to ask. For example, if you're feeling
really angry, and somebody says, "What's great about this?," you may not be willing to respond. But if
you value learning highly, you might be willing to answer your own questions of, "What can I leam
from this situation? How can I use this situation?"
Your desire for new distinctions will cause you to take the time to answer your questions, and in so
doing, you'll change your focus, your state, and the results you're getting.
Ask yourself some empowering questions right now. What are you truly happy about in your life right
now? What's really great in your life today? What are you truly grateful for? Take a moment to think
about the answers and notice how good it feels to know that you have legitimate reasons for you to
feel great now.
2. Questions change what we delete. Human beings are marvelous "deletion creatures." You and I
have so many millions of things going on around us that we can focus on right now, from the blood
flowing through our ears to the wind that may be brushing against our arms. However, we can
consciously focus on only a small number of things simultaneously. Unconsciously, the mind can do all
sorts of things, but consciously we're limited in terms of the number of things we can focus on
simultaneously. So the brain spends a good deal of its time trying to prioritize what to pay attention to,
and more importantly, what not to pay attention to, or what to "delete."
If you're feeling really sad, there is only one reason: it's because you're deleting all the reasons you
could be feeling good. And it you're feeling good, it's because you're deleting all the bad things you
could be focusing on. So when you ask someone a question, you change what they're focusing on and
what they're deleting. If someone asks you, "Are you as frustrated as I am with this project?," even if
you weren't frustrated before, you may begin to focus on what you were deleting previously, and you
may start to feel bad, too. If someone asks you, "What's really lousy in your life?," then you may be
compelled to answer, regardless of how ridiculous the question is. If you don't answer it consciously,
then the question can stick in your mind unconsciously.
Conversely, if you're asked, "What's really great in your life?," and you keep focusing on the answer,
you might find yourself feeling excellent immediately. If someone says, "You know this project really is
great.
Have you ever thought about the impact we're going to have because of what we've created here?,"
you might become inspired by a project that seemed laborious. Questions are the laser of human
consciousness.
They concentrate our focus and determine what we feel and do. Stop for a moment and as you look
around the room, ask yourself a question: "What in this room is brown?" Look around and see it:
brown, brown, brown. Now, look down at this page. Blocking off your peripheral vision, think of
everything that's . . . green. If you're in a room you know very well, you can probably do this easily,
but if you're in a strange room, chances are that you'll remember a lot more brown than green. So
now look around and notice what's green: green, green, green. Do you see more green this time?
Again, if you're in an unfamiliar environment, I'm sure your answer is yes. What does this teach us?
Whatever we look for we'll find.
So, it you're angry, one of the best things you could ask yourself is, "How can I learn from this
problem so that this never happens again?" This is an example of a quality question, in that it will lead
you from your current challenge to finding resources that can keep you from having this pain in the
future. Until you ask this question you're deleting the possibility that this problem is really an
opportunity.

THE POWER OF PRESUPPOSITION
Questions have the power to affect our beliefs and thus what we consider possible or impossible. As we
learned in Chapter 4, asking penetrating questions can weaken the reference legs of disempowering
beliefs, enabling us to dismantle them and replace them with more empowering ones. But did you
realize that the specific words we select and the very order of the words that we use in a question can
cause us to not even consider certain things while taking others for granted? This is known as the
power of presupposition, something of which you should be very aware.
Presuppositions program us to accept things that may or may not be true, and they can be used on us
by others, or even, subconsciously, by ourselves. For example, if you ask yourself a question like "Why
do I always sabotage myself?" after something ends disappointingly, you set yourself up for more of
the same and set in motion a self-fulfilling prophecy. Why? Because, as we've already said, your brain
will obediently come up with an answer for anything you ask of it. You'll take for granted that you've
sabotaged things because you're focusing on why you do it, not on whether you do it.
One example occurred during the 1988 presidential election, just after George Bush had announced
Dan Quayle as his running mate. A television news organization conducted a nationwide poll, asking
people to call a 900 number to answer the question, "Does it bother you that Dan Quayle used his
family's influence to go into the National Guard and stay out of Vietnam?" The glaring presupposition
built into this question, of course, was that Quayle had indeed used his family's influence to unfair
advantage—something that had never been proven. Yet people responded to it as if it were a given.
They never questioned it, and just automatically accepted it. Worse, many people called to say that
they were extremely upset about this fact. No such fact was ever substantiated!
Unfortunately, this process happens all too often; we do it to ourselves and to others all the time.
Don't fall into the trap of accepting someone else's or your own disempowering presuppositions. Find
references to back up new beliefs that empower you.
3. Questions change the resources available to us. I arrived at a critical juncture in my life about five
years ago when I came home from a grueling schedule on the road to discover that one of my
business associates had embezzled a quarter of a million dollars and run my company $758,000 into
debt. The questions I failed to ask when I first hired this man had brought me to this point, and now
my destiny hinged on the new questions I would ask. All of my advisors informed me that I had only
one choice: I'd have to declare bankruptcy. They immediately started asking questions like "What
should we sell off first? Who will tell the employees?" But I refused to accept defeat. I resolved that,
whatever it took, I would find a way to keep my company going. I'm still in business today not
because of the great advice I got from those around me, but because I asked a better question: "How
can I turn this around?"
Then I asked an even more inspirational question: "How can I turn my company around, take it to the
next level and cause it to have even more impact than it ever has in the past?" I knew that if I asked a
better question, I'd get a better answer.
At first, I didn't get the answer I wanted. Initially, it was, "There is no way to turn it around," but I
kept asking with intensity and expectation. 1 expanded my question to "How can I add even more
value, and help more people even while I sleep? How can I reach people in a way that is not limited to
my physical presence?" With these questions came the idea of my franchise operation in which more
people could represent me across the country. Out of these same questions, a year later I came up
with the idea of producing a television infomercial, an answer that I received from that same burning
question.
Since that time, we have created and distributed over 7 million tapes worldwide. Because I asked a
question with intensity, I got an answer that's helped me develop relationships with people all over the
world whom I would never have otherwise had a chance to meet, know, or touch in any way.
In the realm of business, especially, questions do open up new worlds and give us access to resources
we might not otherwise realize we have available. At Ford Motor Company, retired president Donald
Petersen was known for his persistent questions: "What do you think? How can your job be improved?"
On one occasion, Petersen asked a question that undoubtedly steered Ford's profitability up the road of
success. He asked designer Jack Telnack, "Do you like the cars you are designing?" Telnack replied,
"Actually, no, I don't." And then Petersen asked him the critical question: "Why don't you ignore
management and design a car you'd love to own?"
The designer took the president at his word and went to work on the 1983 Ford Thunderbird, a car
that inspired the later models of Taurus and Sable. By 1987, under the direction of master questioner
Petersen, Ford had surpassed General Motors in profitability, and today Taurus ranks as one of the
finest cars made. Donald Petersen is a great example of someone who really utilized the incredible
power of questions. With one simple question, he completely changed the destiny of Ford Motor
Company. You and I have that same power at our disposal every moment of the day. At any moment,
the questions that we ask ourselves can shape our perception of who we are, what we're capable of,
and what we're willing to do to achieve our dreams. Learning to consciously control the questions you
ask will take you further to achieving your ultimate destiny than almost anything I know. Often our
resources are limited only by the questions we ask ourselves.
One important thing to remember is that our beliefs affect the questions we'll even consider. Many
people would never have asked the question "How can I turn things around?" simply because everyone
around them had told them it was impossible. They would feel it was a waste of their time and energy.
Be careful not to ask limited questions, or you'll receive limited answers. The only thing that limits
your questions is your belief about what's possible. A core belief that has shaped my personal and
professional destiny is that if I continue to ask any question, I will receive an answer. All we need to do
is to create a better question, and we'll get a better answer. A metaphor I sometimes use is that life is
just a Jeopardy! game; all the answers are there—all you have to do is come up with the right
questions to win.

PROBLEM-SOLVING QUESTIONS
The key, then, is to develop a pattern of consistent questions that empower you. You and I both know
that no matter what we're involved with in our lives, there are going to be times when we come up
against these things we call "problems": the roadblocks to personal and professional progress. Every
person, no matter what station of life they've achieved, has to deal with these special "gifts."
The question is not whether you're going to have problems, but how you're going to deal with them
when they come up. We all need a systematic way to deal with challenges. So, realizing the power of
questions to immediately change my state and give me access to resources and solutions, I began to
interview people and ask them how they got themselves out of problems. I found out that there are
certain questions that seem to be somewhat consistent. Here is a list of the five questions I use for
any type of problem that comes up, and I can tell you that these have absolutely changed the quality
of my life. If you choose to use them, they can do the same for you as well.
I'll never forget one of the first times I used these questions to change my state. It was after I'd been
on the road almost 100 days out of 120.
I was utterly exhausted. I found a stack of "urgent" memos that had to be responded to from
executives of a variety of my companies, and a list of over 100 phone calls that I had to return
personally. These were not calls from people wanting to visit with me, but important calls to some of
my closest friends, business associates, and family members. I lost it right then and there! I began to
ask myself some incredibly disempowering questions: "How come I have no time? Why don't they
leave me alone?

THE PROBLEM-SOLVING QUESTIONS
1. What is great about this problem?
2. What is not perfect yet?
3. What am I willing to do to make it the way I want it?
4. What am I willing to no longer do in order to make it the way I want it?
5. How can I enjoy the process while I do what is necessary to make it the way I want it?
Don't they understand I'm not a machine? Why don't I ever get a break?" You can imagine what kind
of emotional state I was in at this point. Fortunately, in the midst of it I caught myself. I broke my
pattern and realized that getting angrier wasn't going to make it any better; it was going to make it
worse. My state was making me ask terrible questions.
I needed to change my state by asking some better questions. I turned to my checklist of problemsolving questions and began with,
1. "What is great about this problem?" My first response, like so many other times, was "Absolutely
nothing!" But I thought about it for a moment and realized that just eight years ago I would have
given anything to have twenty business associates and friends who wanted to visit with me, much less
100 people of such national impact and caliber that this list of friends and business associates
represented. As I realized this, I started to laugh at myself, it broke my pattern, and I began to feel
grateful that there were so many people whom I respect and love who wanted to spend time with me.
2. "What is not perfect yet?" My schedule obviously needed more than a little fine-tuning. 1 felt like I
had no time to myself, and that my life was out of balance. Note the presupposition of this question:
asking "What is not perfect yet?" clearly implies that things will be perfect. This question not only gives
you new answers, but reassures you simultaneously.
3. "What am I willing to do to make it the way I want it?" I decided then that I was willing to organize
my life and my schedule so that they were more balanced, and I was willing to take control and learn
to say no to certain things. I also realized that I needed to hire a new CEO for one of my companies,
someone who could handle some of my workload. This would give me more special time at home and
with my family.
4. "What am I willing to no longer do in order to make it the way I want it?" I knew that I could no
longer whine and complain about how unfair it all was or feel abused when people were really trying to
support me.
5. "How can I enjoy the process while I do what is necessary to make it the way I want it?" When I
asked this last, most important question, I looked around for a way to make it fun. I thought, "How
can I enjoy making 100 calls?" Sitting there at my desk did not turn up the mental and emotional juice.
Then I got an idea: I'd not been in my Jacuzzi in six months. I quickly slipped on my swim trunks,
grabbed my portable computer and speaker phone, and headed for the Jacuzzi. I set up shop out in
my back yard, and started making the calls. I called a few of my business associates in New York and
teased them, saying, "Really, it's that cold? Hmmm. Well, it's really tough out here in California, you
know. I'm sitting here in my Jacuzzi!" We all had fun with it and I managed to turn the whole "chore"
into a game. (But I was so wrinkled that I looked about 400 years old by the time I got to the bottom
of my list!)
That Jacuzzi is always in my back yard, but you'll notice that it took the right question to uncover it as
a resource. By having the list of these five questions in front of you on a regular basis, you have a
pattern of how to deal with problems that will instantly change your focus and give you access to the
resources you need.
"He that cannot ask cannot live."
OLD PROVERB
Every morning when we wake up, we ask ourselves questions. When the alarm goes off, what question
do you ask yourself? Is it, "How come I have to get up right now?," "Why aren't there more hours in
the day?,"
"What if I hit the snooze alarm just one more time?" And as you get in the shower, what are you
asking yourself? "Why do I have to go to work?," "How bad is the traffic going to be today?," "What
kind of stuff is going to be dumped on my desk today?" What if every day you consciously started
asking a pattern of questions that would put you in the right frame of mind and that caused you to
remember how grateful, happy, and excited you are? What kind of day do you think you'd have, with
those positive emotional states as your filter? Obviously it would affect how you feel about virtually
everything.
Realizing this, I decided I needed a "success ritual," and I created a series of questions that I ask
myself every morning. The wonderful thing about asking yourself questions in the morning is that you
can do it in the shower, while you're shaving or drying your hair, and so on. You're already asking
questions anyway, so why not ask the right ones? I realized that there are certain emotions we all
need to cultivate in order to be happy and successful individuals. Otherwise, you could be winning and
feel like you're losing, if you don't keep score or take the time to feel how fortunate you are. So take
the time now to review the following questions. Take a moment to deeply experience the feelings of
each one.

THE MORNING POWER QUESTIONS
Our life experience is based on what we focus on. The following questions are designed to cause you to
experience more happiness, excitement, pride, gratitude, joy, commitment, and love every day of
your life. Remember, quality questions create a quality life.
Come up with two or three answers to all of these questions and feel fully associated. If you have
difficulty discovering an answer simply add the word "could." Example: "What could I be most happy
about in my life now?"
1. What am I happy about in my life now?
What about that makes me happy? How does that make me feel?
2. What am I excited about In my life now?
What about that makes me excited? How does that make me feel?
3. What am I proud about in my life now?
What about that makes me proud? How does that make me feel?
4. What am I grateful about In my life now?
What about that makes me grateful? How does that make me feel?
5. What am I enjoying most in my life right now?
What about that do I enjoy? How does that make me feel?
6. What am I committed to in my life right now?
What about that makes me committed? How does that make me feel?
7. Who do I love? Who loves me?
What about that makes me loving? How does that make me feel?
In the evening, sometimes I ask the Morning Questions, and sometimes I ask an additional three
questions. Here they are:
THE EVENING POWER QUESTIONS
1. What have I given today?
In what ways have I been a giver today?
2. What did I learn today?
3. How has today added to the quality of my life or how can I use today as an investment in my
future?
Repeat the Morning Questions (optional).

If you really want to create a shift in your life, make this a part of your daily ritual for personal success.
By consistently asking these questions, you'll find that you access your most empowering emotional
states on a regular basis, and you'll begin to create the highways to these emotions of happiness,
excitement, pride, gratitude, joy, commitment, and love.
Pretty soon, you'll find that when you open your eyes, these questions will fire off automatically just
out of habit, and you will have trained yourself to ask the kinds of questions that will empower you to
experience greater richness in life.

GIVE THE GIFT OF QUESTIONS
Once you know how to ask empowering questions, you not only can help yourself, but others as well.
You can give these as a gift to other people. Once in New York City, I met a friend and business
associate of mine for lunch. A prominent literary attorney, I admired him for his business acumen and
for the practice he'd built since he was a young man. But on that day, he had suffered what he
perceived as a devastating blow—his partner had left the firm, leaving him with tremendous overhead
and not many ideas as to how to turn it around.
Remember that what he was focusing on was determining the meaning. In any situation, you can focus
on what is disempowering, or on what is empowering, and if you look for it that's what you'll find. The
problem was that he was asking all the wrong questions: "How could my partner abandon me this way?
Doesn't he care? Doesn't he realize that this is destroying my life? Doesn't he realize that I can't do
this without him? How will I explain to my clients that I can't stay in business any longer?" All of these
questions were riddled with presuppositions about how his life was destroyed.
I had many ways in which I could intervene, but I decided that I could just ask him a few questions. I
said, "Recently I've created this simple questions technology, and when I've applied it to myself, I've
found it to have incredible impact. It's pulled me out of some pretty tough spots. Do you mind if I ask
you a couple questions and see if it works for you?" He said, "Yeah, but I don't think anything's going
to help me right now." So I started out by asking him the Morning Questions, and then the ProblemSolving Questions.
I started with, "What are you happy about? I know that sounds stupid and ridiculous and Pollyanna,
but what are you really happy about?" His first response was, "Nothing." So I said, "What could you be
happy about right now if you wanted to be?" He said, "I'm really happy about my wife because she's
doing really well right now, and our relationship is very close." I asked him, "How does that make you
feel when you think of how close you are with her?" He said, "It's one of the most incredible gifts in my
life." I said, "She's a special lady, isn't she?" He started focusing on her and feeling phenomenal.
You might say that I was just distracting him. No, 1 was helping him to get into a better state, and in a
better state, you can come up with better ways of dealing with challenges. First we had to break the
pattern and put him in a positive emotional environment.
I asked him what else he was happy about. He started talking about how he should be happy about
how he'd just helped a writer to close his first book deal, and the writer was delighted. He told me that
he should feel proud, but he didn't. So I asked him, "If you did feel proud, how would that feel?" He
began to think about how great that would be, and his state began to change immediately. I said,
"What are you proud of?" He said, "I'm really proud of my kids. They're such special people.
They're not just successful in business; they really care about people. I'm proud of who they've
become as men and women and that they're my children. They're part of my legacy." 1 said, "How
does it make you feel to know that you've had that impact?"
All of a sudden, a man who had earlier believed that his life was over came alive. I asked him what he
was really grateful for. He said that he was really grateful that he'd made it through the tough times
when he was a young and struggling lawyer, that he'd built his career from the bottom up, that he'd
lived the American Dream. Then I asked, "What are you really excited about?" He said, "Actually, I'm
excited that I have an opportunity right now to make a change." And it was the first time he'd thought
about that, and it was because he'd changed his state so radically. I asked him, "Who do you love, and
who loves you?" He started talking about his family and how incredibly close they were. So I asked
him, "What's great about your partner's leaving?" He said, "You know, what could be great about this
is that I hate coming to New York City. I love being at my home in Connecticut." He continued, "What's
great about this is that I get to look at everything in a new way." This started a whole string of
possibilities and he resolved to set up a new office in Connecticut not five minutes from his home,
bring his son into the business, and have an answering service pick up his calls in Manhattan. He got
so excited, he decided to immediately go and look for a new office.
In a matter of minutes, the power of questions had worked their magic. He always had the resources
to be able to deal with this, but the disempowering questions he'd asked had rendered his power
inaccessible, and had caused him to see himself as an old man who'd lost everything he'd built. In
reality, life had given him a tremendous gift, but the truth had been deleted until he started asking
quality questions.

A QUESTION OF DESTINY
One of my favorite people—and one of the most impassioned men I've ever met—is Leo Buscaglia,
author of Love and many other outstanding books in the area of human relations. One of the things
that is great about Leo is his continued persistence in asking himself a question that his father instilled
in him from the time he was a little boy. Each day at the dinner table, his father would ask, "Leo, what
have you learned today?" Leo had to have an answer, and a quality one. If he hadn't learned
something really interesting in school that day, he would run and get the encyclopedia to study
something that he could share. He says that to this day he won't go to bed until he's learned
something new that's of value. As a result he's constantly stimulating his mind, and a great deal of his
passion and love for learning has come from this question, asked repeatedly, begun decades ago.
What are some questions that would be useful for you to ask of yourself on a regular basis? I know
two of my favorite are the most simple. They help me to turn around any challenges that may come up
in my life. They are simply, "What's great about this?" and "How can I use this?" By asking what's
great about any situation, I usually find some powerful, positive meaning, and by asking how I can use
it, I can take any challenge and turn it into a benefit. So what are two questions that you can use to
change your emotional states or give you the resources you truly desire? Add two to the standard
morning questions I've already given you, and customize them so that they meet your personal and
emotional needs.
Some of the most important questions we'll ask in our lives are "What is my life really about?," "What
am I really committed to?," "Why am I here?," and "Who am I?" These are incredibly powerful
questions, but if you wait to get the perfect answer, you're going to be in deep trouble.
Often, the first emotional, gut-level response you get to any question is the one you should trust and
act upon. This is the final point I want to make with you. There's a point at which you must stop asking
questions in order to make progress. If you keep asking questions, you're going to be uncertain, and
only certain actions will produce certain results. At some point, you've got to stop evaluating and start
doing.
How? You finally decide what's most important to you, at least m the moment, and you use your
personal power to follow through and begin to change the quality of your life. So let me ask you a
question. If there was one action that you could take immediately to instantly change the quality of
your emotions and feelings each and every day of your life, would you want to know about it? Then go
on quickly to ...
9
THE VOCABULARY OF ULTIMATE SUCCESS
"A powerful agent is the right word. Whenever we come upon one of those intensely right words . . .
the resulting effect is physical as well as spiritual, and electrically prompt."
MARK TWAIN
Words . . . They've been used to make us laugh and cry. They can wound or heal. They offer us hope
or devastation. With words we can make our noblest intentions felt and our deepest desires known.
Throughout human history, our greatest leaders and thinkers have used the power of words to
transform our emotions, to enlist us in their causes, and to shape the course of destiny. Words can not
only create emotions, they create actions. And from our actions flow the results of our lives. When
Patrick Henry stood before his fellow delegates and proclaimed, "I know not what course others may
take; but as for me, give me liberty, or give me death!," his words ignited a firestorm that un- leashed
our forefathers' unbridled commitment to extinguish the tyranny that had suppressed them for so long.
The privileged heritage that you and I share, the choices that we have today because we live in this
nation, were created by men who chose words that would shape the actions of generations to come:
When in the Course of human Events,
it becomes necessary for one People to
dissolve the Political Bands which have connected them with another . . .
This simple Declaration of Independence, this assemblage of words, became the vessel of change for a
nation. Certainly, the impact of words is not limited to the United States of 201 America. During World
War II, when the very survival of Great Britain was in question, one man's words helped to mobilize
the will of the English people. It was once said that Winston Churchill had the unique ability to send
the English language into battle. His famous call to all Britons to make this their "finest hour" resulted
in courage beyond compare, and crushed Hitler's delusion about the invincibility of his war
machine.
Most beliefs are formed by words—and they can be changed by words as well. Our nation's view of
racial equality was certainly shaped by actions, but those actions were inspired by impassioned words.
Who can forget the moving invocation of Martin Luther King, jr., as he shared his vision, "I have a
dream that one day this nation will rise up and live the true meaning of its creed . . ."?
Many of us are well aware of the powerful pan that words have played in our history, of the power that
great speakers have to move us, but few of us are aware of our own power to use these same words
to move ourselves emotionally, to challenge, embolden, and strengthen our spirits, to move ourselves
to action, to seek greater richness from this gift we call life.
An effective selection of words to describe the experience of our lives can heighten our most
empowering emotions. A poor selection of words can devastate us just as surely and just as swiftly.
Most of us make unconscious choices in the words that we use; we sleepwalk our way through the
maze of possibilities available to us. Realize now the power that your words command if you simply
choose them wisely.
What a gift these simple symbols are! We transform these unique shapes we call letters (or sounds, in
the case of the spoken word) into a unique and rich tapestry of human experience. They provide us
with a vehicle for expressing and sharing our experience with others; however, most of us don't realize
that the words you habitually choose also affect how you communicate with yourself and therefore
what you experience.
Words can injure our egos or inflame our hearts—we can instantly change any emotional experience
simply by choosing new words to describe to ourselves what we're feeling. If, however, we tail to
master words, and if we allow their selection to be determined strictly by unconscious habit, we may
be denigrating our entire experience of life. If you describe a magnificent experience as being "pretty
good," the rich texture of it will be smoothed and made flat by your limited use of vocabulary. People
with an impoverished vocabulary live an impoverished emotional life; people with rich vocabularies
have a multihued palette of colors with which to paint their experience, not only for others, but for
themselves as well.
Most people are not challenged, though, by the size of the vocabulary they consciously understand,
but rather by the words they choose to use. Many times, we use words as "short cuts," but often
these short cuts shortchange us emotionally. To consciously control our lives, we need to consciously
evaluate and improve our consistent vocabulary to make sure that it is pulling us in the direction we
desire instead of that which we wish to avoid. You and I must realize that the English language is filled
with words that, in addition to their literal meanings, convey distinct emotional intensity. For example,
if you develop a habit of saying you "hate" things—you "hate" your hair; you "hate" your job; you
"hate" having to do something—do you think this raises the intensity of your negative emotional states
more than if you were to use a phrase like "I prefer something else"?
Using emotionally charged words can magically transform your own state or someone else's. Think of
the word "chivalry." Does it conjure up different images and have more emotional impact than words
like "politeness" or "gentlemanliness"? I know that for me it does. Chivalry makes me think of a valiant
knight seated on a white steed, championing his raven-haired damsel; it conveys nobility of spirit, a
great round table about which are seated men of honor, the whole Arthurian ethic—in short, the
wonder of Camelot. Or how do the words "impeccable" or "integrity" compare to "well done" and
"honesty"? The words "pursuit of excellence" certainly create more intensity than "trying to make
things better."
For years I've observed firsthand the power of changing just one key word in communicating with
someone, and noted how it instantly changes the way people feel—and often the way they
subsequently behaved. After working with hundreds of thousands of people, I can tell you something I
know beyond a shadow of a doubt, something that at first glance may be hard to believe: Simply by
changing your habitual vocabulary—the words you consistently use to describe the emotions of your
life—you can instantaneously change how you think, how you feel, and how you live.
The experience that first triggered this insight for me occurred several years ago in a business meeting.
I was with two men, one who used to be the CEO of one of my companies and the other a mutual
associate and good friend, and in the midst of the meeting we received some rather upsetting news.
Someone with whom we were negotiating was obviously "trying to take unfair advantage," had
violated the integrity of our understanding, and it appeared he had the upper hand. To say the least,
this angered and upset me, but although I was caught up in the situation, I couldn't help but notice
how differently the two people sitting next to me responded to the same information.
My CEO was out of control with rage and fury while my associate was hardly moved by the situation.
How could all three of us hear of these actions that should have impacted us all equally (we all had the
same stake in the negotiation), yet respond in such radically different ways? Quite honestly, the
intensity of my CEO's response to the situation seemed even to me to be disproportionate to what had
occurred. He kept talking about how "furious" and "enraged" he was, as his face turned beet-red and
the veins in his forehead and neck visibly protruded. He clearly linked acting on his rage with either
eliminating pain or gaining pleasure. When I asked him what being enraged meant to him, why he was
allowing himself to be so intense about this, through clenched teeth he said, "If you're in a rage, you
get stronger, and when you're strong, you can make things happen—you can turn anything around!"
He regarded the emotion of rage as a resource for getting himself out of the experience of pain and
into the pleasure of feeling like he was in control of the business.
I then turned to the next question in my mind: Why was my friend responding to the situation with
almost no emotion at all? I said to him, "You don't seem to be upset by this. Aren't you angry?" And
my CEO said, "Doesn't it make you FURIOUS?" My friend simply said, "No, it's not worth being upset
over." As he said this, I realized that in the several years 1 had known him, I'd never seen him
become very upset about anything. I asked him what being upset meant to him, and he responded, "If
you get upset, then you lose control." "Interesting," I thought. "What happens if you lose control?" He
said matter-of-factly, "Then the other guy wins."
I couldn't have asked for a greater contrast: one person clearly linked the pleasure of taking control to
becoming angry, while the other linked the pain of losing control to the same emotion. Their behavior
obviously reflected their beliefs. I began to examine my own feelings. What did I believe about this?
For years I've believed that I can handle anything it I'm angry, but 1 also believe that I don't have to
be angry to do so. I can be equally effective in a peak state of happiness. As a result, I don't avoid
anger—I use it if I get in that state—nor do I pursue it, since I can access my strength without being
"furious." What really interested me was the difference in the words that we all used to describe this
experience. I had used the words "angry" and "upset," my CEO had used the words "furious" and
"enraged," and my friend had said that he was "a bit annoyed" by the experience. I couldn't believe it!
Annoyed?
I turned to him and said, "That's all you feel, just a little bit annoyed? You must get really angry or
upset some of the time." He said, "Not really. It takes a lot to make that happen, and it almost never
occurs." I asked him, "Do you remember the time the IRS took a quarter- of a million dollars of your
money, and it was their mistake? Didn't it take you two and a half years to get the money back? Didn't
that make you unbelievably angry?" My CEO chimed in, "Didn't that make you LIVID?" He said, "No, it
didn't upset me. Maybe I was a little bit peeved." Peeved? I thought this was the stupidest word I'd
ever heard! I would never have used a word like that to describe my emotional intensity. How could
this wealthy and successful businessman go around using a word like "peeved" and still keep a straight
face? The answer is, he didn't keep a straight face! He seemed almost to enjoy talking about things
that would have driven me crazy.
I began to wonder, "If I did use that word to describe my emotions, how would I begin to feel? Would I
find myself smiling where I used to be stressed? Hmmm," I thought, "maybe this warrants some
looking into." For days after that, I continued to be intrigued by the idea of using my friend's language
patterns and seeing what it would do to my emotional intensity. What might happen if, when I was
feeling really angry, I could turn to somebody and say, "This really peeves me!"? Just the thought of it
made me laugh—it was so ridiculous. For fun, I decided to give it a shot. I got my first opportunity to
use it after a long night flight when I arrived at my hotel. Because one of my staff had neglected to
handle the check-in for me, I had the privilege of standing at the front desk for an extra fifteen or
twenty minutes, physically exhausted and at my emotional threshold. The clerk dragged himself to the
check-in counter and began to hunt-and-peck my name into the computer at a pace that would make
a snail impatient. I felt "a bit of anger" welling up inside of me, so I turned to the clerk and said, "You
know, I know this isn't your fault, but right now I'm exhausted and I need to get to my room quickly
because the longer I stand here the more I fear I will become a bit PEEVED."
The clerk glanced up at me with a somewhat perplexed look, and then broke a smile. I smiled back;
my pattern was broken. The emotional volcano that had been building up inside of me instantly cooled,
and then two things happened. I actually enjoyed visiting for a few moments with the clerk, and he
sped up. Could just putting a new label on my sensations be enough to break my pattern and truly
change my experience? Could it really be that easy? What a concept! Over the next week, I tried my
new word over and over again. In each case, I found that saying it had the impact of immediately
lowering my emotional intensity. Sometimes it made me laugh, but at the very minimum it stopped
the momentum of being upset from rushing me into a state of anger. Within two weeks, I didn't even
have to work on using the word: it became habitual. It became my first choice in describing my
emotions, and I found myself no longer getting in these extremely angry states at all. I became more
and more fascinated with this tool that I'd stumbled across. I realized that by changing my habitual
vocabulary, I was transforming my experience; I was using what I would later call "Transformational
Vocabulary." Gradually, I began to experiment with other words, and I found that if I came up with
words that were potent enough, I could instantly lower or increase my intensity about virtually
anything.
How does this process really work? Think of it this way: imagine that your five senses funnel a series
of sensations to your brain. You're getting visual, auditory, kinesthetic, olfactory, and gustatory stimuli,
and they are all translated by your sense organs into internal sensations. Then they must be organized
into categories. But how do we know what these images, sounds, and other sensations mean? One of
the most powerful ways that man has learned to quickly decide what sensations mean (is it pain or
pleasure?) is to create labels for them, and these labels are what you and I know as "words."
Here's the challenge: all of your sensations are coming to you through this funnel, like liquid sensation
poured through a thin spout into various molds called words. In our desire to make decisions quickly,
rather than using all of the words available to us and finding the most appropriate and accurate
description, we often force the experience into a disempowering mold. We form habitual favorites:
molds that shape and transform our life experience. Unfortunately, most of us have not consciously
evaluated the impact of the words we've grown accustomed to using. The problem occurs when we
start consistently pouring any form of negative sensation into the word-mold of "furious" or
"depressed" or "humiliated" or "insecure." And this word may not accurately reflect the actual
experience. The moment we place this mold around our experience, the label we put on it becomes our
experience. What was "a bit challenging" becomes "devastating."
For example, my CEO used "furious," "livid," and "enraged"; I called it "angry" or "upset"; and when it
came to my friend, he poured66 his experience into the mold of "peeved" or "annoyed." What's
interesting is that all of us, I discovered, use these same patterns of words to describe multitudes of
frustrating experiences. You and I need to know that we can all have the same sensations, but the way
in which we organize them—the mold or word we use for them—becomes our experience. I later found
that by using my friend's mold (the words "peeved" or "annoyed")
I instantly was able to change the intensity of my experience. It became something else. This is the
essence of Transformational Vocabulary: the words that we attach to our experience become our
experience. Thus, we must consciously choose the words we use to describe our emotional states, or
suffer the penalty of creating greater pain than is truly warranted or appropriate.
Literally, words are used to re-present to us what our experience of life is. In that representation, they
alter our perceptions and feelings.
Remember, if three people can have the same experience, yet one person feels rage, another feels
anger, and the third feels annoyance, then obviously the sensations are being changed by each
person's translation.
Since words are our primary tool for interpretation or translation, the way we label our experience
immediately changes the sensations produced in our nervous systems. You and I must realize that
words do indeed create a biochemical effect.
If you doubt this, I'd like you to honestly consider whether or not there are words that, if someone
were to use them, would immediately create an emotional reaction. If someone hurls a racial slur at
you, how does that make you feel? Or if someone were to call you a four-letter word, for example,
wouldn't that change your state? There's probably a big difference between someone calling you by the
initials "S.O.B." and having them articulate in graphic detail the phrase these letters stand for.
Wouldn't it produce a different level of tension in your body than if they were to call you an "angel"? Or
a "genius"? Or a "dude"? We all link tremendous levels of pain to certain words. When I interviewed Dr.
Leo Buscaglia, he shared with me the findings of a research study done at an eastern university in the
late fifties. People were asked, "How would you define communism?" An astonishing number of the
66

pour gießen, schütten; pour out ausgießen, -schütten; Getränk eingießen; strömen (auch übertragen)
respondents were terrorized even by the question, but not many could actually define it—all they knew
was that it was horrifying! One woman even went so far as to say, "Well, I don't really know what that
means, but there hadn't better be any in Washington." One man said that he knew everything he
needed to know about Communists and that what you needed to do was kill them! But he couldn't
even explain what they were. There is no denying the power of labels to create sensations and
emotions.
"Words form the thread on which we string our experiences."
ALDOUS HUXLEY
As I began to explore the power of vocabulary, I still found myself fighting the idea that something as
simplistic as changing the words that we use could ever make such a radical difference in our life
experience.
But when my study of language intensified, I came across some surprising facts that began to
convince me that words absolutely do filter and transform experience. For instance, I found that,
according to Compton's Encyclopedia, English contains at least 500,000 words, and I've since read
from other sources that the total may be closer to 750,000 words! English definitely has the largest
number of words of any language on earth today, with German running a distant second, tallying
roughly half the number.
What I found so fascinating was that, with the immense number of words we could possibly use, our
habitual vocabulary is extremely limited. Various linguists have shared with me that the average
person's working vocabulary consists of only between 2,000 and 10,000 words. Conservatively
estimating English to contain half a million words, that means we regularly use only ½ of 1 percent to
2 percent of the language!
What's an even greater tragedy? Of these words, how many do you think describe emotions? I was
able to find over 3,000 words related to human emotion by going through a group of thesauruses.
What struck me was the proportion of words that describe negative versus positive emotions. By my
count, 1,051 words describe positive emotions, while 2,086 (al- most twice as many!) describe
negative emotions. Just as one example, I found 264 words to describe the emotion of sadness—words
like "despondent," "sullen," "heavy-hearted," "moody," "woeful," "grievous," "tearful," "melancholy"—
yet only 105 to describe cheerfulness, as in "blithe," "jaunty," "perky," "zestful," and "buoyant." No
wonder people feel bad more than they feel good!
As I described to you in Chapter 7, when participants at my Date With Destiny seminar make out their
list of emotions that they feel in a week, the majority of them come up with only about a dozen. Why?
It's because we all tend to experience the same emotions again and again: certain people tend to be
frustrated all of the time, or angry, or insecure, or frightened, or depressed. One of the reasons is that
they constantly use these same words to describe their experience. If we were to analyze more
critically the sensations we have in our bodies, and be more creative in our way of evaluating things,
we might attach a new label to our experience and thereby change our emotional reality.
I remember reading years ago about a study conducted in a prison. Typically, it was found that when
inmates experienced pain, one of the few ways they could communicate it was through physical
action—their limited vocabulary limited their emotional range, channeling even the slightest feelings of
discomfort into heightened levels of violent anger. What a contrast to someone like William F. Buckley,
whose erudition and command of the language allow him to paint such a broad picture of emotions and
thus represent within himself a variety of sensations! If we want to change our lives and shape our
destiny, we need to consciously select the words we're going to use, and we need to constantly strive
to expand our level of choice.
To give you further perspective, the Bible uses 7,200 different words; the poet and essayist John
Milton's writing included 17,000; and it's said that William Shakespeare used over 24,000 words in his
varied works, 5,000 of them only once. In fact, he's responsible for creating or coining many of the
English words we commonly use today. Here's a list of just a few you might find interesting:

RIPPINGLY ON THE TONGUE
Here, from the book, Brush Up Your Shakespeare! by Michael Macrone, is a smattering of powerful,
state-inducing words coined by the master of the English language, Shakespeare.
amazement

money's worth

savagery

arch-villain

moonbeam

shipwrecked

assassination

mortifying

shooting star

bloodstained

to negotiate

to sire

bluster

nimble-footed

to sneak

to champion

obscene

to squabble

cold-hearted

Olympian

stealthy

disgraceful

pageantry

to swagger

eventful

to perplex

tardiness

fathomless

to puke

time-honored

gallantry

puppy dog

to torture

hostile

on purpose

tranquil

invulnerable

quarrelsome

transcendence

jaded

radiance

trippingly

lackluster

reliance

unearthly

laughable

remorseless

watchdog

lustrous

rose-cheeked

yelping

madcap

sacrificial

zany

majestic

Linguists have proven beyond a shadow of a doubt that culturally we're shaped by our language.
Doesn't it make sense that the English language is so verb-oriented? After all, as a culture we're very
active and pride ourselves on our focus of taking action. The words we use consistently affect the way
we evaluate, and therefore the way we think. By contrast, the Chinese culture places a high value on
that which does not change, a fact reflected in the many dialects featuring a predominance of nouns
rather than verbs. From their perspective, nouns represent things that will last, while verbs (as actions)
will be here today and gone tomorrow.
Thus, it's important to realize that words shape our beliefs and impact our actions. Words are the
fabric from which all questions are cut. As we noted in the last chapter, by changing one word in a
question, we can instantly change the answer we'll get for the quality of our lives.
The more I pursued an understanding of the impact of words, the more impressed I became with their
power to sway human emotion, not only within myself, but within others as well.
"Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible to know men."
CONFUCIUS
One day I began to realize that this idea, as simple as it was, was no fluke, that Transformational
Vocabulary was a reality, and that by changing our habitual words, we could literally change the
emotional patterns of our lives. Further, we could therefore mold the actions, directions, and ultimate
destinies of our lives. One day I was sharing these distinctions with a longtime friend of mine. Bob
Bays. As I did so, I could see him light up like a Christmas tree. He said, "Wow! I have another
distinction to give you." He began to relate an experience to me that he'd had recently. He, too, had
been on the road keeping an intense schedule and meeting everyone else's demands. When he finally
came home, all he wanted to do was have some "space." He has a home on the ocean in Malibu, but
it's a very small place, not designed to have house guests, much less three or tour.
When he arrived on his doorstep, he found that his wife had invited her brother to stay with them, and
that his daughter, Kelly, who was supposed to visit for two weeks, had decided to stay for two months.
To add insult to injury, someone had turned off the VCR that he'd preset for a football game he'd been
looking forward to viewing for days! As you can imagine, he hit his own "emotional threshold," and
when he found out who had turned off his VCR—his daughter—he immediately unloaded on her,
screaming all the four-letter words he could think of. This was the very first time in her life that he had
even raised his voice to her, much less used language of that color. She immediately burst into tears.
Witnessing this scene. Bob's wife, Brandon, broke into peals of laughter. Since this was so unlike Bob's
normal behavior, she assumed this was an outrageous and massive pattern interrupt. In reality, he
wished he had been doing a pattern interrupt. After the smoke began to clear, and she realized he
was actually furious, she became concerned, so she gave him some very valuable feedback. She said,
"Bob, you're acting so strangely. You never act this way. You know, I noticed something else: you
keep using a certain word that I've never heard you use before. Usually when you're stressed, you say
you're overloaded, but lately I hear you talking all the time about how you're overwhelmed. You never
say that; Kelly uses that word, and when she does, she feels this same kind of rage and behaves very
much like you just did."
"Wow," I began to think as Bob told me the story, "Is it possible that, by adopting someone else's
habitual vocabulary, you began to adopt their emotional patterns as well?" And isn't this especially true
if you've adopted not only their words, but also their volume, intensity, and tonality, too?
"In the beginning was the Word..."
JOHN 1:1
I'm sure that one of the reasons we often become like the people we spend time with is that we do
adopt some of their emotional patterns by adopting some of their habitual vocabulary. People who
spend any amount of time with me soon find themselves using words like "passionate," "outrageous,"
and "spectacular" to describe their experiences. Can you imagine the difference that produces in their
positive states as compared to someone who says they're merely feeling "okay"? Can you imagine how
using the word "passion" could cause you to peg your emotional scale? It's a word that transforms,
and because I consistently use it, my life has more emotional juice.
Transformational Vocabulary can allow us to intensify or diminish any emotional state, positive or
negative. This means it gives us the power to take the most negative feelings in our lives and lower
their intensity to the point where they no longer bother us, and take the most positive experiences and
move them to even greater heights of pleasure and empowerment.
Later that day, as Bob and I were having lunch, we became immersed in a series of projects we were
working on together. At one point, he turned to me and said, "Tony, I can't believe that anyone in the
world could ever be bored." I agreed. "I know what you mean. Seems crazy, doesn't it?" He said,
"Yeah, boredom's not even in my vocabulary." Just as he said that, I asked, "What did you just say?
Boredom is a word that's not in your vocabulary... Do you remember what we were talking about
earlier? It's not in your vocabulary, and you don't experience the feeling.
Hmmm. Is it possible that we don't experience certain emotions because we don't have a word to
represent them?"

THE WORDS YOU CONSISTENTLY SELECT WILL SHAPE YOUR DESTINY
Earlier I said that the way we represent things in our minds determines how we feel about life. A
related distinction is that if you don't have a way of representing something, you can't experience it.
While it may be true that you can picture something without having a word for it, or you can represent
it through sound or sensation, there's no denying that being able to articulate something gives it
added dimension and substance, and thus a sense of reality. Words are a basic tool for representing
things to ourselves, and often if there's no word, there's no way to think about the experience. For
example, some Native American languages have no word for "lie"—that concept is simply not a part of
their language. Nor is it a part of their thinking or behavior. Without a word for it, the concept doesn't
seem to exist. In fact, the Tasaday tribe in the Philippines reportedly ^as no words for "dislike," "hate"
or "war"—what a thought!
Returning to my initial question, if Bob never feels bored, and he doesn't have that word in his
vocabulary, I had to ask further, "What's a word that 1 never used to describe how I'm feeling?" The
answer I came up with was "depression." 1 may get frustrated, angry, curious, peeved, or overloaded,
but I never get depressed. Why? Had it always been that way? No. Eight years ago, I'd been in a
position where I felt depressed all the time. That depression drained every ounce of my will to change
my life, and at the time it made me see my problems as permanent, pervasive, and personal.
Fortunately I got enough pain that I pulled myself out of that pit, and as a result I linked massive pain
to depression. I began to believe that being depressed was the closest thing to being dead. Because
my brain associated such massive pain to the very concept of depression, without my even realizing it,
I had automatically banned it from my vocabulary so that there was no way to represent or even feel it.
In one stroke I had purged my vocabulary of disempowering language and thus a feeling that can
devastate even the stoutest of hearts. If an assemblage of words you're using is creating states that
disempower you, get rid of those words and replace them with those that empower you!
At this point you may be saying, "This is just semantics, isn't it? What difference does it make to play
with words?" The answer is that, if all you do is change the word, then the experience does not change.
But if using the word causes you to break your own habitual emotional patterns, then everything
changes. Effectively using Transformational Vocabulary—vocabulary that transforms our emotional
experience—breaks unresourceful patterns, makes us smile, produces totally different feelings,
changes our states, and allows us to ask more intelligent questions.
For instance, my wife and I are both passionate people who feel deeply about things. Early in our
relationship, we would often get into what we used to call "pretty intense arguments." But after
discovering the power of the labels we put on our experience to alter that experience, we agreed to
refer to these "conversations" as "spirited debates." That changed our whole perception of it. A
"spirited debate" has different rules than an argument, and it definitely has a different emotional
intensity to it. In seven years, we've never returned to that habitual level of emotional intensity that
we had previously associated with our "arguments."
I also began to realize that I could soften emotional intensity even further by using modifiers; for
example, by saying, "I'm just a bit peeved," or "I'm feeing a tad out of sorts." One of the things Becky
will do now, if she starts to get a little frustrated, is to say, "I'm beginning to get a smidge cranky." We
both laugh because it breaks our pattern. Our new pattern is to make a joke of our disempowering
feelings before they ever reach the point of our being upset—we've "killed the monster while it's
little."
When I shared this Transformational Vocabulary technology with my good friend Ken Blanchard, he
related to me examples of several words he uses to change his state. One is a word he adopted in
Africa when he was on safari and the truck he was in broke down. He turned to his wife, Marge, and
said, "Well, that's rather inconvenient." It worked so well in changing their states, now they use the
word on a regular basis. On the golf course, if a shot doesn't go the way he wants, he'll say, "That shot
just underwhelms me." Tiny shifts like these change the emotional direction and therefore the quality
of our lives.
YOU CAN USE TRANSFORMATIONAL VOCABULARY TO HELP OTHERS
Once you understand the power of words, you become highly sensitized not only to those you use, but
to those that people around you use as well. As a result of my new understanding of Transformational
Vocabulary, I found myself helping others around me. I'll never forget the first time I began to
consciously use this technology. It was in helping a friend of mine named Jim, a very successful
businessman who was going through some tough times. I remember that I'd never seen him so down
before.
As he talked, I noticed that he described how depressed he was, or how depressing things were, at
least a dozen times in a twenty-minute period. I decided to see how quickly Transformational
Vocabulary could help him to change his state, so I asked him, "Are you really depressed, or are you
feeling a little frustrated?" He said, "I am feeling very frustrated." I said, "It looks to me like you're
actually making some very positive changes that will lead to progress." Since he agreed, I described to
him the impact his words might be having on his emotional state, and asked, "Do me a favor, okay?
For the next ten days, promise me you won't use the word 'depressed' even once. If you begin to use
it, immediately replace it with a more empowering word. Instead of 'depressed,' say, 'I'm feeling a
little bit down.' Say, 'I'm getting better,' or 'I'm turning things around.'"
He agreed to commit to this as an experiment, and you can guess what happened: one simple shift in
his words shifted his pattern completely. He no longer worked himself up to the same level of pain,
and as a result, he stayed in more resourceful states. Two years later when I told Jim that I was
writing about his experience in this book, he shared with me that he has not felt depressed one day
since that time because he never uses that word to describe his experience. Remember, the beauty of
Transformational Vocabulary is its utter simplicity. It's truly profound knowledge—something so simple
and universally applicable that the minute you use it, it can immediately increase the quality of your
life.
A great example of the transformation that's possible when you change just one word is what occurred
several years ago at PIE, the nationwide trucking service. Their executives found that 60 percent of all
their shipping contracts were erroneous, and it was costing them more than a quarter of a million
dollars a year. Dr. W. Edwards Deming was hired to find the cause. He did an intensive study and
discovered that 56 percent of these errors were based on misidentification of containers by their own
workers. Based on Dr. Deming's. recommendations, the PIE executives decided that they must find a
way to change the company- wide level of commitment to quality and that the best way would be to
change how their workers viewed themselves. Instead of workers or truckers, they started referring to
themselves as craftsmen. At first people thought it was strange; after all, what difference could
changing a job title make? They hadn't really changed anything, had they? But pretty soon, as a result
of regularly using the word the workers began to see themselves as "craftsmen," and in less than
thirty days PIE cut their 56 percent erroneous shippings down to less than 10 percent, ultimately
saving close to a quarter of a million dollars a year.
This illustrates a fundamental truth: the words we use as a corporate culture and as individuals have a
profound effect on our experience of reality. One of the reasons I created the word CANI! rather than
borrow the Japanese term kaizen ("improvement"), was to build into one word the philosophy and
thought patterns of constant, never-ending improvement. Once you begin to consistently use a word,
it affects what you consider and how you think. The words that we use carry meaning and emotion.
People invent words all the time; that's one of the marvels67 of the English language, which is so quick
to embrace new words and concepts. If you look through a current dictionary you'll discover the
contributions of many foreign languages, and especially from all kinds of special-interest groups.
For example, people in the surfing culture have created words like tubular" and "rad" to translate their
"totally awesome" experience of the waves to their day-to-day lives. Their private lingo gained such
widespread acceptance that it became pan of our common argot and thus the way in which we think.
This also brings up the point again that we need to be conscious of the words we adopt from those
around us or those we select ourselves. If you use phrases like "I'm suicidal" you have instantly raised
your emotional pain to a level that could actually threaten the quality of your life. Or, if you're in a
romantic relationship and tell your partner, "I'm leaving," you create the very real possibility that the
relationship's about to end. If, however you were to say, "I'm incredibly frustrated" or "I'm angry," you
have a much better chance at resolution.
Most professions have a certain set of words they use to describe their work and the things particular
to their type of work. Many entertainers for example right before they go onstage, get a feeling of
tension in their stomachs. Their breathing changes, their pulse races, and they begin to perspire.
Some consider this to be a natural pan of the preparation to perform, while others see it as evidence
that they will fail These sensations which Carly Simon called "stage fright," kept her from performing
live for years. Bruce Springsteen, on the other hand, gets the same kind of tension in his stomach,
only he labels these feelings "excitement"' He knows that he's about to have the incredibly powerful
experience of entertaining thousands of people, and having them love it. He can't wait to get onstage.
For Bruce Springsteen, tension in his stomach is an ally for Carly Simon, it's an enemy.

TAKE THESE YARD APES AND GET RID OF THE GREY POUPON!
Following are some fun examples from Newsweek's "Buzzwords" of Transformational Vocabulary used
in the workplace...
Daycare
Yard ape: A fully mobile preschooler. Usage: "At least yours is in school. I've got a yard ape to contend
with."
Klingons: Hysterical yard apes who latch on ferociously to parents.
Chemobyl Hussies: A particularly nasty diaper, as in, "Honey, you better warn Scandinavia."
Green Elevens: The green, dripping nostrils of a yard ape.
Grey Poupon: The mess in the diapers.
67

marvel 1. Wunder; 2. (besonders Brt. -ll-, Am. -l-) sich wundern, staunen
Funeral Directors
This term itself is a major piece of Transformational Vocabulary. What did they used to be called?
Undertakers. Then they became morticians, and now they're funeral directors, a term most people find
a little easier to take...
Shake 'n' Bake: Cremation without a funeral home service. Usage: "Oh, this guy's just a Shake 'n'
Bake."
Peekaboo: A brief viewing of the body and short service, usually involving only family members.
SWAT Teams
Avon Calling: Blowing open a door with a shotgun.
Lawyers
Shopper: A financially dependent spouse with no personal income, as in "She'll need a ton of alimony.
She's a shopper."
Bombers: Divorce lawyers who seek to destroy the opposing spouse by setting all of the assets for
their own client.
Tanning Salons
Caspers: Pale-skinned customers. (Derived from Casper the Friendly Ghost)
Iguanas: Overly tanned, leathery customers.

FROM TINKLED TO TURBO-CHARGED
What would your life be like if you could take all the negative emotions you ever felt and lower their
intensity so they didn't impact you as powerfully, so you were always in charge? What would your life
be like if you could take the most positive emotions and intensify them, thereby taking your life to a
higher level? You can do both of these in a heartbeat. Here's your first assignment.
Take a moment right now, and write down three words that you currently use on a regular basis to
make yourself feel lousy (bored, frustrated, disappointed, angry, humiliated, hurt, sad, and so forth).
Whatever words you choose, be sure they are ones that you use regularly to disempower yourself. To
discover some of the words you need to transform, ask yourself, "What are some negative feelings I
have on a consistent basis?"
Next, having identified these three words, have some fun. Put yourself in a crazy and outrageous state
and brainstorm some new words that you think you could use to either break your pattern or at least
lower your emotional intensity in some way. Let me give you a clue on how to select some words that
will really work for you over the long term. Remember that your brain loves anything that gets you out
of pain and into pleasure, so pick a word that you'll want to use in place of the old, limiting one. One of
the reasons I used "peeved" or "a bit annoyed" instead of "angry" is that they sound so ridiculous. It's
a total pattern interrupt for me and anyone who's listening to me, and since I love to break patterns, I
get a lot of fun and pleasure out of using these words. Once you get results like that, I guarantee
you'll also get addicted to the process. To help you get started, here are some examples of simple and
ridiculous words you can use to immediately lower your intensity:
Negative

fearful

Emotion/Expression

frightened

I'm feeling...

frustrated

angry

to
to

frustrated

afraid

to

furious

anxious

to

humiliated

anxious

to

humiliated

confused

to

hurt

depressed

to

hurt

depressed

to

I hate

depressed

to

impatient

Transforms Into

insecure

I'm feeling . ..

insulted

disenchanted

insulted

uncomfortable

irritated

a little concerned

irritated

expectant

jealous

curious

lazy

calm before action

lonely

not on top of it

lonely

on the road to a tum-around

lost

The Vocabulary of Ultimate Success

nervous

destroyed

overloaded

that stinks

overwhelmed

pissed off

overwhelmed

disappointed

overwhelmed

disappointed

overwhelmed

disgusted
dread
embarrassed
embarrassed
exhausted
exhausted
failure

set back

failure

that's a little aromatic

failure

tinkled

fear

underwhelmed
delayed

painful

surprised

petrified

challenge

rejected

aware

rejected

stimulated

rejected

recharging

rejected

a little droopy

rejected

stumble

sad

learning

scared

getting educated

oh, shit

wonderment

sick

curious

stressed

inquiring

stressed

challenged

stressed

fascinated

stupid

passionate

stupid

uncomfortable

stupid

surprised

terrible

bothered

many opportunities

dinged

maximized

I prefer

moving and shaking

anticipating

uncomfortable

questioning

challenged

misunderstood

deflected

misinterpreted

learning

stimulated

overlooked

ruffled

underappreciated

overioving

misunderstood

storing energy

sorting my thoughts

available

excited

temporarily on my own

oh, poo

searching

cleansing

energized

busy

stretching

blessed

some imbalance

energized

busy

discovering

challenged

unresourceful

in demand overwhelmed

learning

overwhelmed

different

overwhelmed
Now, you can do better than this list, I'm sure, so come up with three words that you habitually use
that create negative feelings in your life, and then write a list of alternatives that would either break
your pattern by making you laugh because they're so ridiculous, or at least lower the intensity.
Old, Disempowering Word

New, Empowering Word

1.___________________

___________________

2.___________________

___________________

3.___________________

___________________

How do you make sure that you really use these words? The answer is simple: NAC yourself.
Remember Neuro-Associative Conditioning? Remember the first two steps?
Step One: Decide that you're committed to having much more pleasure in your life and a lot less pain.
Realize that one of the things that's kept you from having that is using language that intensifies
negative emotion.
Step Two: Get leverage on yourself so that you'll use these three new words. One way to do this is to
think of how ridiculous it is to work yourself into a frenzy when you have the choice of feeling good!
Maybe an even more powerful way to get leverage is to do what I did: approach three friends and
share with them the words that you want to change. For example, I found myself being frustrated a lot
in my life, so I decided to become "fascinated" instead. I also was often saying, "I have to do this,"
and it made me feel stressed. Since I wanted a reminder about how fortunate I am, and because it
really transformed my experience, I began to say, "I get to do this." I don't have to do anything! And
instead of being "angry," I wanted to either be "annoyed," "peeved," or "a little bit concerned."
For the next ten days, if I caught myself using the old word, I would immediately break my pattern
and replace it with the new word. By giving myself pleasure for committing and following through, I
established a new pattern. My friends, though, were there to help me if I got off track. They were to
immediately ask me, "Tony, are you angry, or are you just peeved?" "Are you frustrated or
fascinated?" I made it clear to them not to use this as a weapon, but as a tool of support. Within a
short period of time, these new language patterns became my consistent approach.
Does this mean that I can never feel "angry"? Of course not. Anger can be a very useful emotion at
times. We just don't want our most negative emotions to be our tools of first resort. We want to add to
our level of choice. We want to have more of those molds in which to pour our liquid sensations of life
so that we have a greater number and quality of emotions in our lives.
If you really want to make these changes, go to three of your friends, explain to them what you're
doing, what words you want, and have them ask you respectfully, "Are you (old word) or (new word)?"
Make the commitment to break your own patterns as well, whenever possible. Give yourself immediate
pleasure whenever you use the new alternative, and you'll develop a new level of choice for your life.
Of course, using Transformational Vocabulary is not limited to lowering negative intensity; it also offers
us the opportunity to powerfully intensify our experience of positive emotions. When someone asks
how you're doing, instead of saying, "Okay" or "So-so," knock their socks off by exclaiming, "I feel
spectacular!" As simplistic as this sounds, it creates a new pattern in your neurology—a new neural
highway to pleasure. So right now, write down three words you use to describe how you're feeling or
how you're doing on a regular basis that are "just okay" in their orientation—"I'm feeling good," "I'm
fine," "Things are all right." Then come up with new ones that will absolutely inspire you. If you want
some suggestions, look at the following list and circle the ones that you think would be fun to add to
your vocabulary to spice up your current experience of life:
Good Word

Great Word

I'm feeling

I'm feeling ...

alert

energized

all right

superb

attractive

gorgeous

awake

raring to go

comfortable

smashing

confident

unstoppable

content

serene

cool

outrageous

curious

fascinated

determined

unstoppable

energized

turbo-charged

enthusiastic

excited

excited

ecstatic

excited

impassioned

excited

outrageous

fantastic

fabulous

fast

ballistic

feeling good

cosmically charged

feeling good

just tremendous

fine

awesome

focused

energized

fortunate

unbelievably
blessed

full

replete

fun

vivacious

glad

over the moon

good

better than excellent

good

dynamite
good

just doesn't get any
better

good

magic

good

vibrant

great

exuberant

great

exhilarated

great

killer

great

incredible

great

phenomenal

happy

ecstatic

happy

jazzed

happy

stoked, exuberant
and hyped

happy

totally blissed

intense

laser-like

interested

enthralled

interesting

captivating

like

enraptured

like

idolize

like

relish

loved

adored

loving

exuding love

loving

passionate

motivated

compelled

motivated

driven to

motivated

juiced

moving forward

moving at warp
speed

nice

fantastic

nice

spectacular

no problem

happy to

not bad

couldn't be better

okay

energized

okay

fantastic

okay

perfect!

paying attention

focused

peaceful

serene

perfect

extraordinary

pleasant

monumental

powerful

invincible
pretty good

coolamundo

pretty good

great

pumped up

soaring

quick

explosive

resourceful

brilliant

satisfied

satiated

secure

centered

secure

confident

secure

emboldened

secure

empowered

smart

gifted

stimulated

charged up

strong

invincible

super

booming

tasty

sumptuous

terrific

ecstatic

Use the same system of contacting your three friends to make sure you use these new, powerful,
positive words, and have fun doing it!

SOFTEN YOUR APPROACH TO PAIN WITH OTHERS
It's difficult to overestimate the impact our Transformational Vocabulary has on ourselves and on
others. We need to remember the value of using what I call softeners and intensifiers; they give us a
greater degree of precision in our dealings with others, whether it's a romantic relationship, a business
negotiation, or all the possible scenarios in between. Years ago, when I thought something was
"screwed up" in my business, I would call the appropriate person and say, "I'm really upset" or "I'm
really worried about this." Do you know what that did? My language pattern automatically put the
other person into reaction, even if it wasn't my intention; often, they tended to become defensive,
something that prevented both of us from finding a solution to the challenge before us.
So what I learned to do instead was to say (even if I felt more intensity), "I'm a little bit concerned
about something. Can you help me?" First of all, doing this lowered my own emotional intensity. This
benefited both me and the person with whom I was communicating. Why? Because "concerned" is a
much different word than "worried." If you say that you're worried about something, you may be
conveying the impression that you don't have faith in this person's abilities. And second, adding "a
little bit" softens the message significantly. So by lowering my intensity, I enabled the person to
respond from a position of strength and also enhanced my level of communication with them. Can you
see how this would improve your interactions at home as well? How do you habitually communicate
with your kids? Often we don't realize the power our words have on them. Children, as well as adults,
tend to take things personally, and we need to be sensitized to the possible ramifications of
thoughtless remarks. Instead of continually blurting out impatiently, "You're so stupid!" or "You're so
clumsy!"—a pattern that can in some cases powerfully undermine a child's sense of self-worth—break
your own pattern by saying something like "I'm getting a little bit peeved with your behavior; come
over here and let's talk about this." Not only does this break the pattern, allowing both of you to
access a better state to intelligently communicate your feelings and desires, but it also sends the child
the message that the challenge is not with them as a person but with their behavior—something that
can be changed.
This can build what I call the Reality Bridge, the foundation for more powerful and positive
communication between two people—and have a more powerful, positive impact on your kids.
The key in any of these situations is to be able to break your pattern; otherwise, in your unresourceful
state, you may say things you'll regret later. This is exactly how many relationships are destroyed. In
a state of anger, we may say things that hurt somebody's feelings and make them want to retaliate, or
cause them to feel so hurt that they don't want to open up to us ever again. So we've got to realize
the power of our words, both to create and to destroy.
"The German people is no warlike nation.
It is a soldierly one, which means it does not want a war but does not fear it.
It loves peace but it also loves its honor and freedom."
ADOLF HITLER
Words have been used by demagogues throughout the ages to murder and subjugate, as when Hitler
perverted a nation's frustrations into hatred for a small group of people, and in his lust for territory
persuaded the German populace to gird for war. Saddam Hussein labeled his invasion of Kuwait, and
the subsequent hostilities, a jihad, or "Holy War," which powerfully transformed the Iraqi citizens'
perceptions of the justness of their cause.
To a lesser extent, we can see in our recent history plenty of examples of the careful use of words to
redefine experience. During the recent Persian Gulf War, the military's jargon was unbelievably
complex, but it served to soften the impact of the destruction that was occurring. During the Reagan
administration, the MX missile was renamed the "Peacekeeper." The Eisenhower administration
consistently referred to the Korean War as a "police action."
We've got to be precise in the words we use because they carry meaning not only to ourselves about
our own experience, but also to others. If you don't like the results you're getting in your
communication with others, take a closer look at the words you're using and become more selective.
I'm not suggesting that you become so sensitized that you can't use a word. But selecting words that
empower you is critical.
By the same token, is it always to our advantage to lower the intensity of our negative emotions? The
answer is no. Sometimes we need to get ourselves into an angry state in order to create enough
leverage to make a change. All human emotions have their place, as we'll talk about in Chapter 11.
However, we want to make certain that we do not access our most negative and intense states to start
with. So please don't misinterpret me; I'm not asking you to live a life where you don't have any
negative sensations or emotions. There are places where they can be very important. We'll talk about
one of them in the next chapter. Realize that our goal is to consistently feel less pain in our lives, and
more pleasure.
Mastering Transformational Vocabulary is one of the single most simple and powerful steps toward that
goal.
Beware of labels that can limit your experience. As I mentioned in the first chapter, I worked with a
young boy who was at one time labeled "learning disabled" and is now evaluated as a genius. You can
imagine how that one change in words has radically transformed his perception of himself and how
much of his ability he now taps. What are the words you want to be known by? What characteristic
word or phrase do you want others to identify with you?
We've got to be very careful of accepting other people's labels, because once we put a label on
something, we create a corresponding emotion. Nowhere is this truer than with diseases. Everything
that I've studied in the field of psychoneuroimmunology reinforces the idea that the words we use
produce powerful biochemical effects. In an interview with Norman Cousins, he told me of the work
he'd done in the last twelve years with over 2,000 patients. Time and again, he noticed that the
moment a patient was diagnosed—i.e., had a label to attach to his symptoms—he became worse.
Labels like "cancer," "multiple sclerosis," and "heart disease" tended to produce panic in the patients,
leading to helplessness and depression that actually impaired the effectiveness of the body's immune
system.

AND NOW, A PAUSE FOR OUR SPONSOR ...
Sometimes vocabulary is even more transformational than bargained for—a fact to which several
major advertisers can attest. After translating their slogan "Come Alive! You're in the Pepsi
Generation" into Chinese, corporate officials were stunned to discover that they'd just spent millions of
dollars announcing, "Pepsi Brings Your Ancestors Back from the Grave." Chevrolet, mystified by
sluggish sales of its new Nova compact in Latin America, eventually discovered the Spanish translation
of no va: "It Doesn't Go."

Conversely, studies proved that if patients could be freed of the depression produced by certain labels,
a corresponding boost was automatically produced in their immune systems. "Words can produce
illness; words can kill," Cousins told me. "Therefore, wise physicians are very careful about the way
they communicate." That's one of the reasons why, in Fortune Management,™ our practicemanagement company, we work with doctors not only in helping them to build their businesses, but in
teaching them how to enhance their emotional sensitivity to enable them to contribute more. If you're
in a profession where you work with people, it's imperative that you understand the power of words
to impact those around you.
If you're still skeptical, I suggest that you simply test Transformational Vocabulary on yourself, and
see what happens. Often in seminars, people say things like, "I'm so angry about what this person did
to me!"
I'll ask them, "Are you angry, or are you hurt?" Just asking them that question often makes them
reevaluate the situation. When they select a new word and say, "I guess I'm hurt," you can instantly
see their physiology reflect a drop in intensity. It's a lot easier for them to deal with hurt
than it is with anger.
Similarly, you can try lowering your emotional intensity in areas you may not have thought of. For
instance, instead of using the phrase, "I'm starving to death," what if instead you said, "I feel a little
hungry"? By using that, you'll discover as I have that you can literally lower the intensity of your
appetite in a matter of moments. Sometimes people overeat simply out of a habitual pattern of
whipping themselves into an emotional frenzy. Part of it starts with the language they use consistently.
At a recent Date With Destiny seminar, we witnessed a great example of the power of using words to
change someone's state instantly. One of the participants came back from dinner, absolutely radiant.
She told us that right before dinner she'd had an incredible urge to cry, and ran out of the room,
bawling. "Everything was all jumbled up," she said. "I felt like I was going to burst. I thought I was
going to have a breakdown. But then I said to myself 'No, no, no, you're having a break-up/' That
made me laugh. And then I thought, 'No—you're having a break-through?'" The only thing she had
changed was one word, but by taking control of her labeling process (her vocabulary) she completely
changed her state and her perception of her experience—and thus transformed her reality.
Now is your chance. Take control. Notice the words you habitually use, and replace them with ones
that empower you, raising or lowering the emotional intensity as appropriate. Start today. Set this
processional effect in motion. Write down your words, make your commitment, follow through, and
know what the power of this simple tool in and of itself will accomplish without using anything else.
Next, let's take a look at something that's equally fun and equally simple in empowering you to
manage your emotions consistently. Together, let's blaze a trail of possibility as you .. .

10
DESTROY THE BLOCKS,
BREAK DOWN THE WALL,
LET GO OF THE ROPE,
AND DANCE YOUR WAY TO SUCCESS:
THE POWER OF LIFE METAPHORS
"The metaphor is perhaps one of man's most fruitful potentialities. Its efficacy verges on magic, and it
seems a tool for creation which God forgot inside one of His creatures when He made him."
jose ortega y gasset
"I'm at the end of my rope."
"I can't break through the wall."
"My head is about to burst."
"I'm at a crossroads."
"I struck out."
"I'm floating on air."
"I'm drowning."
"I'm happy as a lark."
"I've reached a dead end."
"I'm carrying the world on my shoulders."
"Life is a bowl of cherries."
"Life is the pits."
In the last chapter we talked about the power of words to shape our lives and direct our destinies. Now,
let's look at certain words that carry even more meaning and emotional intensity: metaphors. In order
to understand metaphors, we must first understand symbols. What creates more immediate impact:
the word "Christian" or the image of a cross? If you're like many people, the cross has more power to
produce immediate positive emotions. It's literally nothing but two intersecting lines, but it has the
power to communicate a standard and a way of life to millions of people. Now take that cross, twist it
into a swastika, and contrast it with the word "Nazi." Which has more power to influence you
negatively?
Again, if you're like most, the swastika will tend to produce stronger sensations more quickly than the
word itself. Throughout human history, symbols have been employed to trigger emotional response
and shape men's behavior. Many things serve as symbols: images, sounds, objects, actions, and, of
course, words. If words are symbolic, then metaphors are heightened symbols.
What is a metaphor? Whenever we explain or communicate a concept by likening it to something else,
we are using a metaphor. The two things may bear little actual resemblance to each other, but our
familiarity with one allows us to gain an understanding of the other. Metaphors are symbols and, as
such, they can create emotional intensity even more quickly and completely than the traditional words
we use. Metaphors can transform us instantly. As human beings, we constantly think and speak in
metaphors. Often people speak of "being caught between a rock and a hard place." They feel like
they're "in the dark," or that they're "struggling to keep their head above water." Do you think you
might be a little bit more stressed if you thought about dealing with your challenge in terms of
"struggling to keep your head above water" rather than "climbing the ladder of success"? Would you
feel differently about taking a test if you talked about "sailing" through it rather than "flailing"? Would
your perception and experience of time change if you talked about time "crawling" rather than "flying"?
You bet it would!
One of the primary ways we learn is through metaphors. Learning is the process of making new
associations in our minds, creating new meanings, and metaphors are ideally suited for this. When we
don't understand something, a metaphor provides a way of seeing how what we don't understand is
like something we do understand. The metaphor helps us to link up a relationship. If X is like Y, and
we understand X, suddenly we understand Y. If, for example, someone tries to explain electricity to
you by throwing around the terms "ohms," "amperes," "wattage," and "resistors," chances are they'll
totally confuse you because it's likely you have no understanding of these words, no references for
them, and therefore it's difficult to understand a relationship between them.
But what if I explained electricity to you by comparing it to something you were already familiar with?
What if I drew you a picture of a pipe and said, "Have you ever seen water running through a pipe?"
You'd say yes. Then I'd say, "What if there were a little flap that could slow down the amount of water
going through the pipe? That little flap is what a resistor does in an electrical unit." Would you now
know what a resistor is? You bet—and you'd know it instantly. Why? Because I told you how this was
like something you already understood. All great teachers—Buddha, Mohammed, Confucius, Lao-Tzu—
have used metaphors to convey their meaning to the common man. Regardless of religious beliefs,
most would agree that Jesus Christ was a remarkable teacher whose message of love has endured not
only because of what he said, but also the way in which he said it. He didn't go to the fishermen and
tell them he wanted them to recruit Christians; they would have no reference for recruiting. So he told
them he wanted them to become "fishers of men."
The minute he used that metaphor, they immediately understood what they needed to do. This
metaphor instantly gave them an analogous step-by-step process for how to bring others into the faith.
When he told his parables, he distilled complex ideas into simple images that transformed anyone who
took their message to heart. In fact, not only was Jesus a master storyteller, but he used his whole life
as a metaphor to illustrate the strength of God's love and the promise of redemption68.
Metaphors can empower us by expanding and enriching our experience of life. Unfortunately, though,
if we're not careful, when we adopt a metaphor we instantaneously also adopt many limiting beliefs
that come with it. For years physicists used the metaphor of the solar system to describe the
relationship of the electrons to the protons and neutrons within the nucleus of an atom. What was
great about this metaphor? It immediately helped students understand the relationship between the
atom and something they already understood. They could immediately picture the nucleus as the sun
and the electrons as planets revolving around it. The challenge was that by adopting this metaphor,
physicists—without realizing it—adopted a belief system that electrons remained in equidistant orbits
from the nucleus, very much in the same way that planets remained in basically equidistant orbits
from the sun. It was an inaccurate and limiting presupposition. In tact, it locked physicists for years
into a pattern of irresolution of many atomic questions, all because of a false set of presuppositions
adopted due to this metaphor. Today we know that electrons don't maintain equidistant orbits; their
orbits vary in distance from the nucleus. This new understanding wasn't adopted until the solar system
metaphor had been abandoned. The result was a quantum leap in the understanding of atomic energy.

68

redemption Einlösung; RELIGION Erlösung
GLOBAL METAPHORS
Remember my raging69 CEO? The same day I made the distinctions that led to the creation of the
technology of Transformational Vocabulary, I discovered the value of what I call global metaphors. I
knew that my CEO used words that intensified his emotion, and I wondered what made him feel those
negative feelings in the first place. As you and I already know, everything we do is based on the state
we're in, and our state is determined by our physiology and the way we represent things in our minds.
So I asked him why he was so upset, and he said, "Well, it's like they have us in a box with a gun to
our heads." Do you think you'd react rather intensely if you believed or represented in your mind that
you were trapped in a situation like this? It's not hard to figure out why he was in a rage. Now, for
many years without realizing it, I'd helped people change how they were feeling by interrupting their
patterns and changing their metaphors. I just wasn't aware of what I was doing. (That's pan of the
power of creating a label: once you have a label for what you do, you can produce a behavior
consistently.)
I turned to the CEO and asked, "What color is the squirt70 gun?" He looked at me in a puzzled state
and said, "What?" I repeated the question, "What color is the squirt gun?" This immediately broke his
pattern. In order to answer my question, his mind had to focus on my weird71 question, which
immediately changed his internal focus. When he began to picture a squirt gun, do you think his
emotion changed as a result? You bet! He started to laugh. You see, virtually any question we ask
repeatedly, a person will eventually entertain an answer to, and when they do answer your question, it
changes their focus. For example, if I tell you over and over, "Don't think of the color blue," what color
are you going to think of? The answer, obviously, is "blue." And whatever you think about, you'll feel.
Getting him to think about the situation in terms of a squirt gun, I immediately shattered his
disempowering imagery, and thereby changed his emotional state in the moment. What about his box?
I handled that in a different way because I knew he was competitive; I simply said, "As far as this box
idea is concerned, I don't know about you, but I know no one could ever build a box big enough to
hold me." You can imagine how quickly that destroyed his box! This man regularly feels intense
because he's operating with aggressive metaphors. If you are feeling really bad about something, take
a quick look at the metaphors you're using to describe how you are feeling, or why you are not
progressing, or what is getting in the way. Often you're using a metaphor that intensifies your
negative feelings. When people are experiencing difficulties they frequently say things like "I feel
like the weight of the world is on my back" or "There's this wall in front of me, and I just can't break
through." But disempowering metaphors can be changed just as quickly as they were created. You
choose to represent the metaphor as being real; you can change the metaphor just as quickly. So if
someone tells me they feel like they have the weight of the world on their back, I'll say, "Set the world
down and move on." They'll give me a funny look, but sure enough, in order to understand what I just

69
rage 1. Wut, Zorn; fly into a rage wütend werden; the latest rage umgangssprachlich: der letzte Schrei; be all
the rage umgangssprachlich: große Mode sein; 2. wettern (against, at gegen); wüten, toben
70
squirt 1. (be)spritzen; 2. Strahl
71
weird unheimlich; umgangssprachlich: sonderbar, verrückt
said, they'll make a change in their focus and therefore how they feel immediately. Or if someone tells
me that they just can't make progress, that they keep hitting a wall, I tell them to stop hitting it and
just drill a hole through it. Or climb over it, or tunnel under it, or walk over, open the door, and go
through it.
You'd be surprised, as simplistic as this sounds, how quickly people will respond. Again, the moment
you represent things differently in your mind, in that moment you'll instantly change the way you feel.
If someone tells me, "I'm at the end of my rope," I'll say, "Set it aside and come over here!" Often
people talk about how they feel "stuck" in a situation. You're never stuck! You may be a little
frustrated, you may not have clear answers, but you're not stuck. The minute you represent the
situation to yourself as being stuck, though, that's exactly how you'll feel. We must be very careful
about the metaphors we allow ourselves to use.
Be careful of the metaphors that other people offer you as well. Recently I read an article about the
fact that Sally Field is now turning 44. The article said she's beginning to start "down the slippery slope
of middle age." What a horrible and disempowering way to represent your expanding wisdom! If you
feel like you're in the dark, then simply turn the lights on. If you feel like you're drowning in a sea of
confusion, walk up the beach and relax on the island of understanding. I know this can sound juvenile,
but what's truly juvenile is allowing ourselves to unconsciously select metaphors that disempower us
on a consistent basis. We must take charge of our metaphors, not just to avoid the problem metaphors,
but so that we can adopt the empowering metaphors as well.
Once you become sensitized to the metaphors you and other people use, making a change is very easy.
All you need to do is ask yourself, "Is this what I really mean? Is this really the way it is, or is this
metaphor inaccurate?" Remember, anytime you use the words "I feel like" or "This is like," the word
"like" is often a trigger for the use of a metaphor. So ask yourself a more empowering question. Ask,
"What would be a better metaphor? What would be a more empowering way of thinking of this? What
else is this like?" For example, if I were to ask you what life means to you, or what your metaphor for
life is, you might say, "Life is like a constant battle" or "Life is a war." If you were to adopt this
metaphor, you'd begin to adopt a series of beliefs that come with it. Like the example of the atom and
the solar system, you'd begin to conduct your behavior based on a set of unconscious beliefs that are
carried within this metaphor.
A whole set of rules, ideas, and preconceived notions accompany any metaphor you adopt. So if you
believe life is a war, how does that color your perceptions of life? You might say, "It's tough, and it
ends with death." Or, "It's going to be me against everybody else." Or, "It's dog eat dog." Or, "If life is
really a battle, then maybe I'm going to get hurt." All these filters impact your unconscious beliefs
about people, possibility, work, effort, and life itself. This metaphor will affect your decisions about
how to think, how to feel, and what to do. It will shape your actions and therefore your destiny.

LIFE IS A GAME
Different people have different global metaphors. For example, in reading interviews with Donald
Trump, I've noticed that he often refers to life as a "test." You either win first place, or you lose there's
no in between. Can you imagine the stress that must create in his life, interpreting it this way? If life
is a test, maybe it's going to be tough; maybe you'd better be prepared; maybe you could flunk out
(or cheat, I suppose). For some people, life is a competition. That might be fun, but it could also mean
that there are other people you have to beat, that there could be only one winner.
For some people, life is a game. How might that color your perceptions? Life might be fun—what a
concept! It might be somewhat competitive. It might be a chance for you to play and enjoy yourself a
lot more. Some people say, "If it's a game, then there are going to be losers."
Other people ask, "Will it take a lot of skill?" It all depends on what beliefs you attach to the word
"game"; but with that one metaphor, again, you have a set of filters that is going to affect the way you
think and the way you feel.
Surely, Mother Teresa's metaphor for life is that it's sacred. What if you believed life is sacred? If that
were your primary metaphor, you might have more reverence for it—or you might think that you
weren't allowed to have so much fun. What if you believe life is a gift? All of a sudden it becomes a
surprise, something fun, something special. What if you think life is a dance? Wouldn't that be a kick?
It would be something beautiful, something you do with other people, something with grace, rhythm,
and joy. Which of these metaphors properly represents life?
They're probably all useful at different times to help you interpret what you need to do to make
changes. But remember, all metaphors carry benefits in some context, and limitations in others. As
I've become more sensitized to metaphors, what I've begun to believe is that having only one
metaphor is a great way to limit your life. There would be nothing wrong with the solar system
metaphor if a physicist had many other ways of describing atoms as well. So if we want to expand our
lives, we should expand the metaphors we use to describe what our life is or what our relationships are,
or even who we are as human beings.
Are we limited to metaphors about life or about atoms? Of course not. We have metaphors for almost
every area of our experience. Take work, for example. Some people will say, "Well, back to the salt
mines" or "I have to put my nose to the grindstone." How do you think those people feel about their
jobs? Some business people I know use global metaphors like "my assets" for the businesses they own
and "my liabilities" for the people they employ. How do you think that affects the way they treat
people? Others look at business as a garden where every day you have to maintain and improve it so
that eventually you will reap a reward. Still others see work as a chance to be with friends, to join a
winning team. As for me, I think of my businesses as families.
This allows us to transform the quality of the connections we share with each other.
"Life is painting a picture, not doing a sum."
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, JR.
Can you see how changing just one global metaphor from "Life is a competition" to "Life is a game"
could instantly change your experience of life in many areas simultaneously? Would it change your
relationships if you saw life as a dance? Could it change the way you operate in your business? You bet
it could! This is an example of a pivot point, a global change, where just making this one change would
transform the way you think and feel in multiple areas of your life. I am not saying that there is a right
or wrong way of looking at things. Just realize that changing one global metaphor can instantly
transform the way you look at your entire life. Just as with Transformational Vocabulary, the power of
metaphors is in their simplicity.
Years ago I was conducting a two-week Certification program in Scottsdale, Arizona. In the middle of
the seminar, a man jumped up and started stabbing out at people with his bare hands as if he were
holding a knife, while screaming at the top of his lungs, "I’m blacking out, I'm blacking out!" A
psychiatrist who was sitting two rows in front of him shouted, "Oh, my God! He's having a psychotic
breakdown!" Fortunately, I didn't accept the psychiatrists label of Transformational Vocabulary.
Instead, all I knew was that I needed to change the excited man's state instantly. I had not developed
the concept of global metaphors yet; I just did what I knew how to do best. I interrupted his pattern.
I went up to him and yelled, "Then just white it out! Use that stuff you use when you're typing! White
it out!" The man was stunned for a moment. He stopped what he was doing, and everybody paused to
see what would happen next.
Within a matter of seconds his face and body changed, and he started to breathe differently. I said,
"White out the whole thing." Then I asked him how he felt and he said, "That feels a lot better." So I
said, "Well, then, sit down," and continued with the seminar. Everyone looked dumb-founded, and to
tell the truth. I, too, was a bit surprised that it worked this easily! Two days later this man approached
me and said, "I don't know what that whole thing was about, but I turned forty that day and just lost it.
I felt like stabbing out because I was in this blackness and it was swallowing me up. But when I put
that White-Out on, everything just brightened up. I felt totally different. I started thinking new
thoughts, and I feel fine today." And he continued to feel fine for the duration—just by changing one
simple metaphor.
So far we've spoken only of how to lower our negative emotional intensity through the use of
Transformational Vocabulary and global metaphors. However, sometimes it's useful and important to
get ourselves to feel negative emotions with strong intensity. For example, I know a couple who have
a son who was caught up in drugs and alcohol. They knew they should do something to get him to
change his destructive patterns, but at the same time they had mixed associations with interfering in
his life. What finally pushed them over the edge and gave them enough leverage to get themselves to
take action and do something was a conversation they had with someone who'd once been addicted
himself. "There are two bullets pointed at your son's head right now," he told them. "One is drugs, the
other is alcohol, and one or the other is going to kill him—it's only a matter of time—if you don't stop
him now."
By representing things in this way, they were driven to action. Suddenly, not taking action would mean
allowing their son to die, whereas previously they had represented his problem as merely being a
challenge. Until they adopted this new metaphor, they were missing the emotional potency to do
whatever it would take. I am happy to tell you that they did succeed in helping this young man turn
things around. Remember, the metaphors we use will determine our actions.
SELECT YOUR GLOBAL METAPHORS
As I developed "antennae" to sensitize myself to people's global metaphors, I read an interview with
anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson in which she said, "Few things are more debilitating than a
toxic metaphor."* That's quite an insight, and one with which I was soon to gain
firsthand experience.
At one of my Date With Destiny seminars, most everybody was complaining about a certain woman
even before the program had begun. She had created a commotion at the registration area, and when
she got into the room she started complaining about everything imaginable: first the room was too hot,
then too cold; she was upset with the person in front of her because he was too tall; and so on. By the
time I got up to speak I couldn't go for more than five minutes without her interrupting and trying to
find how what I said really didn't work, or wasn't really true, or for which there was some kind of
exception.
I kept trying to break her pattern, but I was focusing on the effect rather than the cause. Suddenly I
realized that she must have some global belief or global metaphor about life that made her such a
fanatic for detail and almost spiteful in her approach. I asked her, "What are you trying to gain by
doing this? I know you must have a positive intent. What is your belief about life, or about details, or
about whether things are right or wrong?" She said, "J guess I just believe that small leaks sink the
ship." If you thought you were going to drown, wouldn't you be a little fanatical about finding any
possibility of a leak? That's how this woman viewed life!
Where did this metaphor come from? It turned out that this woman had experienced several situations
in her life where little things cost her a lot. She attributed her divorce to some small problems that
didn't get handled—problems she wasn't even aware of. Similarly, she felt that her financial woes were
the result of equally small causes. She adopted this metaphor to keep her from re-experiencing pain
like this in the future.
Obviously, she wasn't very excited about changing metaphors without my providing a little leverage.
Once I got her to feel the pain that this metaphor was constantly creating in her life, and the
immediate pleasure she could have by changing it, I was able to assist her in breaking her pattern and
changing her metaphor by creating a series of new ways of looking at herself and life.
She combined a variety of global metaphors—life as a game, life as a dance—and you should have
seen the transformation, not just in the way she treated other people, but also in the way she treated
herself, because she had always been finding small leaks in herself as well. This one change affected
the way she approached everything and is a great example of how changing one global metaphor can
transform every area of your life, from your self-esteem to your relationships to the way you deal
with the world at large.
With all the power that metaphors wield over our lives, the scary part is that most of us have never
consciously selected the metaphors with which we represent things to ourselves. Where did you get
your metaphors? You probably picked them up from people around you, from your parents, teachers,
co-workers, and friends. I'll bet you didn't think about their impact, or maybe you didn't even think
about them at all, and then they just became a habit.
"All perception of truth is the detection of an analogy."
HENRY DAVID THOREAU
For years, people asked me what it was I did exactly. At various times I tried different metaphors—
"I'm a teacher," "I'm a student," "I'm a hunter of human excellence," "I'm a speaker," "I'm a national
best-selling author," "I'm a peak performance consultant," "I'm a therapist," "I'm a counselor"—but
none of them conveyed the right feeling. People gave me plenty of metaphors. I was known by many
in the media as a "guru." This is a metaphor I avoided because I felt that the presupposition that went
with it was that people were dependent upon me to create their change—which would never empower
them. Since I believe that we all must be responsible for our own change, I avoided this metaphor.
One day, though, I finally got it. "I'm a coach," I thought. What is a coach? To me, a coach is a person
who is your friend, someone who really cares about you. A coach is committed to helping you be the
best that you can be. A coach will challenge you, not let you off the hook.
Coaches have knowledge and experience because they've been there before. They aren't any better
than the people they are coaching (this took away my need to have to be perfect for the people I was
"teaching").
In fact, the people they coach may have natural abilities superior to their own. But because coaches
have concentrated their power in a particular area for years, they can teach you one or two distinctions
that can immediately transform your performance in a matter of moments.
Sometimes coaches can teach you new information, new strategies and skills; they show you how to
get measurable results. Sometimes a coach doesn't even teach you something new, but they remind
you of what you need to do at just the right moment, and they push you to do it. I thought, "What I
truly am is a success coach. I help to coach people on how to achieve what they really want more
quickly and more easily."
And everyone needs a coach, whether it's a top-level executive, a graduate student, a homemaker, a
homeless person, or the president of the United States! As soon as I started using this metaphor, it
immediately changed the way I felt about myself. I felt less stressed, more relaxed; I felt closer to
people. I didn't have to be "perfect" or "better." I began to have more fun, and my impact on people
multiplied manyfold.

A METAPHOR COULD SAVE YOUR LIFE
Two people Becky and I have the privilege to count as friends are Martin and Janet Sheen. They have
been married for close to thirty years, and one of the things that I respect most about them is their
absolute support for each other, for their family, and for anyone in need. As much as the public knows
Martin is a committed giver, they have no idea how much he and Janet do together for others on a
daily basis. These two people are the epitome of integrity. Their metaphor for humanity is that of "one
giant family," and as a result they feel the deepest caring and compassion even for complete strangers.
I remember when Martin shared with me the moving story of how his life changed years ago while he
was making Apocalypse Now. Before that time, he had seen life as something to fear. Now he sees it
as an intriguing challenge. Why? His new metaphor is that life is a mystery. He loves the
mystery of being a human being, the wonder and sense of possibility that
unfolds with his experience of each new day.
What changed his metaphor? Intense pain. Apocalypse was shot deep in the jungles of the Philippines.
The shooting schedule was normally Monday through Friday, and usually on Friday night, Martin and
Janet would make the two-and-a-half-hour drive for a weekend "retreat" in Manila. On one weekend,
though, Martin had to stay for an additional Saturday morning shoot. (Janet had already committed to
going into town to purchase a glass eye for a crewman who was so poor he was unable to buy his own,
so she went ahead.) That night, Martin found himself alone, tossing and turning, perspiring profusely,
and beginning to experience intense pain. By morning he began to have a massive heart attack.
Portions of his body became numb and paralyzed. He fell to the ground, and through nothing but the
sheer power of his will, crawled out the door and yelled for help. Lying there on the ground, he said he
actually had the experience of dying. All of a sudden, everything felt calm and smooth. He could see
himself moving across the lake and the water in the distance. He thought to himself, "Oh, this is what
dying is," and it was then that he realized that he wasn't afraid of dying, that he had really been afraid
of life! In that moment, he realized that life itself was the real challenge. Instantly, he made the
decision to live. He mustered every ounce of energy he had left, pushing his arm out to grab some
grass.
With total focus, he slowly pulled it up to his nose. He could barely feel a thing. The moment he
smelled the grass, the pain came back, and he knew he was alive. He kept fighting.
When the crewmen discovered him, they were sure he would die. Both the looks on their faces and
their comments made Martin question his own ability to make it. He began to lose his strength.
Realizing there was no time, the top pilot on the Apocalypse crew risked his own life and flew the
helicopter sideways through thirty- to forty-knot winds in order to get him to the hospital in town.
Upon arriving, he was put on a stretcher and wheeled into the emergency room, where he continued to
receive both subliminal and overt messages that he was going to die. He was becoming weaker with
each moment. Then Janet came in. All she'd heard was that he'd had a heat stroke, but then the
doctors informed her of the graveness of his condition. She refused to accept it—she knew that Martin
needed strength; she also knew she had to break his pattern of fear as well as her own. She took
immediate action, and accomplished it all with one statement. When he opened his eyes, she smiled
brightly and said, "It's just a movie, babe! It's only a movie!" Martin said that in that moment he knew
he was going to make it and began to heal. What a great metaphor! Instantly, the problem didn't
seem so grave—it was something he could handle. "A movie certainly isn't worth having a heart attack
over" was the implied message, but also, subliminally, I believe the metaphor cut even deeper. After
all, the pain you're experiencing when you make a movie never lasts. It's not real, and at some point
the director will say "Cut!" Janet's use of this brilliant pattern interrupt, this single metaphor, helped
Martin to marshal his resources, and to this day he believes it saved his life.
Metaphors don't just affect us as individuals; they affect our community and our world as well. The
metaphors we adopt culturally can shape our perceptions and our actions—or lack of action. In the last
few decades, with the advent of moon missions, we began to adopt the metaphor of "Spaceship
Earth." While this metaphor sounded great, it didn't always work well for creating an emotional
response to dealing with our ecological challenges. Why? It's hard to get emotional about a spaceship;
it's disassociated. Contrast that with the feelings created by the metaphor "Mother Earth," How
differently would you feel about protecting your "mother" than you would about keeping a "spaceship"
clean? Pilots and sailors often describe their planes or ships as beautiful women. They say, "She's a
beauty." Why don't they say, "He's a beauty?" Because they'd probably be a lot rougher with that
plane or ship if they thought it was some big, fat guy named Joe rather than some shapely and sleek
princess gliding through the shimmering air or sea.
We use metaphors constantly during war. What was the name for the first pan of the operation in the
Persian Gulf War? Before war was declared, it was called "Operation Desert Shield." But as soon as the
command to fight was given. Operation Desert Shield became "Desert Storm." Think how that one
change of metaphor instantly changed the meaning of the experience for everyone. Instead of
shielding the rest of the Arabs from Saddam Hussein, in General Norman Schwarzkopfs words, the
troops became "the storm of freedom," sweeping the occupying Iraqi forces out of Kuwait.
"An iron curtain has descended across the Continent."
WINSTON CHURCHILL
Think how radically the face of eastern Europe has changed just in the last couple of years. The "Iron
Curtain" was a metaphor that shaped the post-World War II experience for decades, and the Berlin
Wall served as a physical symbol for the imposing barrier that divided all of Europe. When the Berlin
Wall came down in November 1989, more than just a stone wall was demolished. The destruction of
that one symbol instantly provided a new metaphor that changed the beliefs of multitudes of people
about what was possible in their lifetimes. Why did people have so much fun digging away at an old,
crumbling wall when there were plenty of gates they could go through? It was because knocking down
the wall was a universal metaphor for possibility, freedom, and breaking through barriers.

FIT THE WORD TO THE DEED
Being aware of the vast power contained in metaphors includes knowing how to use them in an
appropriate context. The challenge is that a lot of people have metaphors that help them in their
professions, but create challenges at home. I know an attorney who found herself trying to apply
the same adversarial metaphors at home that served her so well at work. Her husband would start a
perfectly innocent conversation with her, and the next thing he knew, he felt like he was up on the
witness stand being cross-examined! That doesn't work too well in a personal relationship, does it? Or
suppose someone is a totally dedicated police officer. If they can't let go of their work when they get
home, do you think they might always be on the lookout for other people violating their standards?
One of the best examples of an inappropriate metaphor is a man who was so dissociated that his wife
and children didn't feel any connection with him at all. They resented the way he never expressed his
true feelings and the fact that he always seemed to be directing them. Do you know what his
profession was? He was an air traffic controller! On the job he had to remain detached. Even if there
was an emergency, he had to keep his voice absolutely calm so as not to alarm the pilots he was
directing. That disassociated attitude worked well in the control tower, but it didn't work at home. Be
careful not to carry the metaphors that are appropriate in one context, like the environment in which
you work, into an incompatible context, like how you relate to your family or friends.
What are some of the metaphors people have for their personal relationships? Some people call the
person they're in a relationship with "the old man" or "the old hag." Some call them "the dictator," "the
ball and chain," "the warden." One woman actually called her husband "the Prince of Darkness"! What
are some more empowering alternatives?
Many people call their mate their "lover," their "better half," their "partner in life," their "teammate,"
their "soul mate." By the way, even changing one slight nuance of a metaphor will change the way you
perceive the relationship. You may not feel passionate for a "partner," but you certainly would for your
"lover." Do you think that the metaphors you use in representing your relationship to yourself as well
as to others would affect the way you feel about it and how you relate to one another? You bet! One
lady who came to a Date With Destiny seminar kept referring to her husband as "this jerk
I'm with," and I had noticed that whenever he talked about her, he called her "the love" of his life or
his "better halt" or his "gift from God." When I pointed this out to her, she was shocked, because she's
a very loving woman who hadn't realized how toxic one casually adopted metaphor could be. Together
we selected more appropriate metaphors for her relationship with her husband.

ALL I WANT FOR CHRISTMAS ...
One of my friends who obviously doesn't have kids used to call them "barters." As long as he held that
metaphor, can you imagine how kids responded to him? Recently, though, he filled in for Santa Claus
at a department store—several of us set him up so he had to do it—and he got to have hundreds of
"barters" come and sit on his lap.
Well, that one experience gave him a totally new view of children and changed his metaphor forever.
Now he calls them "cuddles"! Do you think that changed the way he feels? You'd better believe it.
Calling your kids "brats" doesn't usually make you want to take good care of them or nurture them.
Make sure that you have the appropriate metaphor that supports you in dealing with your children—
remember, they listen and learn from you.
One of the most empowering global metaphors that has helped me through tough times is a story
shared by many speakers in personal development. It's the simple story of a stonecutter. How does a
stonecutter break open a giant boulder? He starts out with a big hammer and whacks the boulder as
hard as he can. The first time he hits it, there's not a scratch, not a chip—nothing. He pulls back the
hammer and hits it again and again—100, 200, 300 times without even a scratch. After all this effort,
the boulder may not show even the slightest crack, but he keeps on hitting it. People sometimes pass
by and laugh at him for persisting when obviously his actions are having no effect. But a stonecutter is
very intelligent. He knows that just because you don't see immediate results from your current actions,
it doesn't mean you're not making progress. He keeps hitting at different points in the stone, over and
over again, and at some point—maybe on the 500th or 700th hit, maybe on the 1,0004th hit—the
stone doesn't just chip, but literally splits in half. Was if this one single hit that broke the stone open?
Of course not. It was the constant and continual pressure being applied to something else. And pretty
soon, what does it become?" And he said, "A butterfly."
I asked, "Can the other little caterpillars on the ground see that this caterpillar became a butterfly?" He
said, "No." I said, "And when a caterpillar breaks out of the cocoon, what does he do?" Joshua said,
"He flies." I said, "Yeah, he gets out and the sunlight dries off his wings and he flies. He's even more
beautiful than when he was a caterpillar. Is he more free or less free?" Josh said, "He's much more
free." And I said, "Do you think he'll have more fun?" And he said, "Yeah—he's got less legs to get
tired!" And I said, "That's right, he does. He doesn't need legs anymore; he's got wings. I think your
friend has wings now.
"You see, it's not for us to decide when somebody becomes a butterfly. We think it's wrong, but I think
God has a better idea when the right time is. Right now it's winter and you want it to be summer, but
God has a different plan. Sometimes we just have to trust that God knows how to make butterflies
better than we do. And when we're caterpillars, sometimes we don't even realize that butterflies exist,
because they're up above us—but maybe we should just remember that they're there." And Joshua
smiled, gave me a big hug and said, "I bet he's a beautiful butterfly."
Metaphors can change the meaning you associate to anything, change what you link pain and pleasure
to, and transform your life as effectively as they transform your language. Select them carefully, select
them intelligently, select them so they will deepen and enrich your experience of life and that of the
people you care about. Become a "metaphor detective." Whenever you hear someone using a
metaphor that places limits, just step in, break their pattern, and offer a new one. Do this with others,
and do it for yourself.
So try the following exercise:
1. What is life? Write down the metaphors you've already chosen: "Life is like. . ." what? Brainstorm
everything you can think of, because you probably have more than one metaphor for life. When you're
in an unresourceful state, you probably call it a battle or a war, and when you're in a good state,
maybe you think of it as a gift. Write them all down. Then review your list and ask yourself, "If life is
such and such, what does it mean to me?" If life is sacred, what does that mean? If life is a dream,
what does that mean? If all the world is a stage, what does that mean? Each of your metaphors
empower and limit. "All the world's a stage" may be great because it means you can go out there and
make a difference and be heard. But it also may mean you're someone who's always performing,
instead of sharing your true feelings. So take a good look at the metaphors that you've made available
to yourself. What are their advantages and disadvantages? What new metaphors might you like to
apply to your life in order to feel more happy, free, and empowered?
2. Make a list of all the metaphors that you link to relationships or marriage. Are they empowering or
disempowering? Remember, conscious awareness alone can transform your metaphors, because your
brain starts to say, "That doesn't work—that's ridiculous.'" And you can adopt a new metaphor easily.
The beauty of this technology is that it's so simple.
3. Pick another area of your life that impacts you most—whether it's your business, your parents, your
children, your ability to learn—and discover your metaphors for this area. Write these metaphors down
and study their impact. Write down, "Learning is like playing." If studying is like "pulling teeth," you
can imagine the pain you're giving yourself! This might be a good metaphor to change, and change
now/ Once again, notice the positive and negative consequences of each of your metaphors. Exploring
them can create new choices for your life.
4. Create new, more empowering metaphors for each of these areas. Decide that from now on you're
going to think of life as four or five new things to start with, at least. Life is not a war. Life is not a test.
Life is a game, life is a dance, life is sacred, life is a gift, life is a picnic— whatever creates the most
positive emotional intensity for you.
5. Finally, decide that you are going to live with these new, empowering metaphors for the next thirty
days.
I invite you to allow the radiance of your new metaphors to "sweep you off your feet" and make you
feel like you're "floating on air" until you arrive at "Cloud Nine." While you're "on top of the world," you
can look down on "Easy Street" and be "tickled pink," knowing that the amount of joy you're feeling in
this moment is only the "tip of the iceberg." Take control of your metaphors now and create a new
world for yourself: a world of possibility, of richness, of wonder, and of joy. Once you've mastered the
creative art of Grafting metaphors, transforming vocabulary, and asking empowering questions, you
are ready to harness. . .

11
THE TEN EMOTIONS OF POWER
"There can be no transforming of darkness into light and of apathy into movement without emotion."
CARL JUNG
I'd like to introduce you to a fellow named Walt. Walt is a good, decent human being who always tries
to do the right thing. He has his life down to a science: everything in its proper place and in the correct
order. Weekdays he arises at exactly 6:30, showers and shaves, gulps down some coffee, grabs his
lunch pail filled with the requisite bologna sandwich and Twinkles, and runs out the door by 7:10 to
spend forty-five minutes in traffic. He arrives at his desk by 8:00, where he sits down to do the same
job he's been doing for the past twenty years.
At 5:00 he goes home, pops the top on a "cold one," and grabs the TV remote-control. An hour later
his wife comes home and they decide whether to eat leftovers or throw a pizza in the microwave. After
dinner he watches the news while his wife bathes their kid and puts him to bed. By no later than 9:30
he's in the sack. He devotes his weekends to yard work, car maintenance, and sleeping in. Walt and
his new wife have been married for three years, and while he wouldn't exactly describe their
relationship as "inflamed with passion," it's comfortable—even though lately it seems to be repeating a
lot of the same patterns of his first marriage.
Do you know someone just like Walt? Maybe he's someone you know intimately—someone who never
suffers the depths of utter devastation or despondency, but also someone who never revels in the
heights of passion and joy. I've heard it said that the only difference between a rut and a grave is a
few feet, and over a century ago, Thoreau observed that "the mass of men lead lives of quiet
desperation." As we move into the next century, this phrase is unfortunately more applicable than ever.
If there's one thing I've noticed in the countless letters I've received since I wrote Unlimited Power, it's
the overwhelming prevalence of this kind of disassociation in people's lives—something that just
"happened" out of their desire to avoid pain—and the hunger with which they seize upon an
opportunity to feel more alive, more passionate, more electric. From my perspective, as I travel
around the world, meeting people from all walks of life and "feeling the pulse" of literally hundreds of
thousands of individuals, we all seem to instinctively realize the risk of emotional "flatline," and
desperately seek ways to get our hearts pumping again.
So many suffer from the delusion that emotions are entirely out of their control, that they're just
something that spontaneously occurs in reaction to the events of our lives. Often we dread emotions
as if they were viruses that zero in on us and attack when we're most vulnerable. Sometimes we think
of them as "inferior cousins" to our intellect and discount their validity. Or we assume that emotions
arise in response to what others do or say to us. What's the common element in all these global beliefs?
It's the misconception that we have no control over these mysterious things called emotions.
Out of their need to avoid feeling certain emotions, people will often go to great, even ridiculous,
lengths. They'll turn to drugs, alcohol, overeating, gambling; they'll lapse into debilitating depression.
In order to avoid "hurting" a loved one (or being hurt by one), they'll suppress all emotions, end up as
emotional androids, and ultimately destroy all the feelings of connection that got them together in the
first place, thus devastating the ones they love most.
I believe there are four basic ways in which people deal with emotion. Which of these have you used
today?
1. Avoidance. We all want to avoid painful emotions. As a result, most people try to avoid any
situation that could lead to the emotions that they fear—or worse, some people try not to feel any
emotions at all! If, for example, they fear rejection, they try to avoid any situation that could lead to
rejection. They shy away from relationships. They don't apply for challenging jobs. Dealing with
emotions in this way is the ultimate trap, because while avoiding negative situations may protect you
in the short term, it keeps you from feeling the very love, intimacy, and connection that you desire
most. And ultimately, you can't avoid feeling. A much more powerful approach is to learn to find the
hidden, positive meaning in those things you once thought were negative emotions.
2. Denial. A second approach to dealing with emotion is the denial strategy. People often try to
disassociate from their feelings by saying, "It doesn't feel that bad." Meanwhile, they keep stoking the
fire within themselves by thinking about how horrible things are, or how someone has taken advantage
of them, or how they do everything right but things still turn out wrong, and why does this always
happen to them? In other words, they never change their focus or physiology, and they keep asking
the same disempowering questions. Experiencing an emotion and trying to pretend it's not there only
creates more pain. Once again, ignoring the messages that your emotions are trying to give you will
not make things better. If the message your emotions are trying to deliver is ignored, the emotions
simply increase their amperage; they intensify until you finally pay attention. Trying to deny your
emotions is not the solution. Understanding them and using them is the strategy you'll learn in this
chapter.
3. Competition. Many people stop fighting their painful emotions and decide to fully indulge in them.
Rather than learn the positive message their emotion is trying to give them, they intensify it and make
it even worse than it is. It becomes a "badge of courage," and they begin to compete with others,
saying, "You think you've got it bad? Let me tell you how bad I've got it!" It literally becomes part of
their identity, a way of being unique; they begin to pride themselves on being worse off than anyone
else. As you can imagine, this is one of the deadliest traps of all. This approach must be avoided at all
costs, because it becomes a self fulfilling prophecy where the person ends up having an investment in
feeling bad on a regular basis—and then they are truly trapped. A much more powerful and healthy
approach to dealing with the emotions that we think are painful is to realize that they serve a positive
purpose, and that is ...
4. Learning and Using. If you want to make your life really work, you must make your emotions
work for you. You can't run from them; you can't tune them out; you can't trivialize them or delude
yourself about what they mean. Nor can you just allow them to run your life. Emotions, even those
that seem painful in the short term, are truly like an internal compass that points you toward the
actions you must take to arrive at your goals. Without knowing how to use this compass, you'll be
forever at the mercy of any psychic tempest that blows your way.
Many therapeutic disciplines begin with the mistaken presupposition that emotions are our enemies or
that our emotional well-being is rooted in our past. The truth is that you and I can go from crying to
laughing in a heartbeat if the pattern of our mental focus and physiology is merely interrupted strongly
enough. Freudian psychoanalysis, for example, searches for those "deep, dark secrets" in our past to
explain our present difficulties. Yet we all know that whatever you continually look for, you will surely
find. If you're constantly looking for the reasons why your past has hamstrung your present, or why
you're so "screwed up," then your brain will comply by providing references to back up your request
and generate the appropriate negative emotions. How much better it would be to adopt the global
belief that "your past does not equal your future"!
The only way to effectively use your emotions is to understand that they all serve you. You must learn
from your emotions and use them to create the results you want for a greater quality of life. The
emotions you once thought of as negative are merely a call to action. In fact, instead of calling them
negative emotions, from now on in this chapter, let's call them Action Signals. Once you're familiar
with each signal and its message, your emotions become not your enemy but your ally. They become
your friend, your mentor, your coach; they guide you through life's most soaring highs and its most
demoralizing lows. Learning to use these signals frees you from your fears and allows you to
experience all the richness of which we humans are capable. To get to this point, then, you must
change your global beliefs about what emotions are. They are not predators, substitutes for logic, or
products of other people's whims. They are Action Signals trying to guide you to the promise of a
greater quality of life.
If you merely react to your emotions through an avoidance pattern, then you'll miss out on the
invaluable message they have to offer you. If you continue to miss the message and fail to handle the
emotions when they first turn up, they'll grow into full-blown crises. All our emotions are important
and valuable in the proper amounts, timing, and context.
Realize that the emotions you are feeling at this very moment are a gift, a guideline, a
support system, a call to action. If you suppress your emotions and try to drive them out of
your life, or if you magnify them and allow them to take over everything, then you're
squandering one of life's most precious resources.
So what is the source of emotions? You are the source of all your emotions; you are the one
who creates them. So many people feel that they have to wait for certain experiences in order to
feel the emotions they desire. For instance, they don't give themselves permission to feel loved or
happy or confident unless a particular set of expectations is met. I'm here to tell you that you can
feel any way you choose at any moment in time.
At the seminars I conduct near my home in Del Mar, California, we've created a fun anchor to remind
us who is really responsible for our emotions. These seminars are held in an exquisite, four-star resort,
the Inn L'Auberge, which sits right on the ocean, and is also near the train station. About four times a
day, you can hear the train whistle loudly as it passes through. Some seminar participants would
become irritated at the interruption (remember, they didn't know about Transformational Vocabulary
yet!), so I decided that this was the perfect opportunity to turn frustration into fun. "From now on," I
said, "whenever we hear that train howl, we'll celebrate. I want to see how good you can make
yourselves feel whenever you hear that train. We're always waiting for the right person or right
situation to come along before we feel good. But who determines whether this is the right person or
situation? When you do feel good, who's making you feel good? You are! But you simply have a rule
that says you have to wait until A, B, and C occur before you allow yourself to feel good. Why wait?
Why not set up a rule that says that whenever you hear a train whistle, you'll automatically feel great?
The good news is that the train whistle is probably more consistent and predictable than the people
you're hoping will show up to make you feel good!"
Now, whenever we hear the train pass, jubilation ensues. People immediately jump out of their chairs,
cheer and holler, and act like silly maniacs—including doctors, lawyers, CEOs—people who were
supposedly intelligent before they arrived! As everyone sits back down, uproarious laughter ensues.
What's the lesson? You don't have to wait for anything or anyone! You don't need any special reason
to feel good—you can just decide to feel good right now, simply because you're alive, simply because
you want to.
So if you're the source of all your emotions, why don't you feel good all the time? Again, it's because
your so-called negative emotions are giving you a message. What is the message of these Action
Signals?
They're telling you that what you're currently doing is not working, that the reason you have pain is
either the way you're perceiving things or the procedures you're using: specifically, the way you're
communicating your needs and desires to people, or the actions you're taking.
What you're doing is not producing the result you want, and you have to change your approach.
Remember that your perceptions are controlled by what you focus on and the meanings you interpret
from things. And you can change your perception in a moment, just by changing the way you're using
your physiology or by asking yourself a better question.
Your procedures include your style of communication. Maybe you're being too harsh in the way you
communicate, or maybe your procedure is not even communicating your needs, and you're expecting
other people to know what you need. This could create a lot of frustration, anger, and hurt in your life.
Maybe this Action Signal of feeling hurt is trying to tell you that you need to change your way of
communicating so you don't feel hurt again in the future. Feeling depressed is another call to action,
telling you that you need to change your perception that the problems you're dealing with are
permanent or out of control. Or, you need to take some kind of physical action to handle one area of
your life so that once again you remember that you are in control.
This is the true message of all your Action Signals. They're merely trying to support you in taking
action to change the way you think, change the way you're perceiving things, or change your
procedures for communicating or behaving. These calls to action are there to remind you that you
don't want to be like the fly who keeps banging himself against the window, trying to get through the
glass—if you don't change your approach, all the persistence in the world will never pay off. Your
Action Signals are whispering to you (perhaps screaming!), through the experience of pain, that you
need to change what you're doing.

SIX STEPS TO EMOTIONAL MASTERY
I've found that whenever I feel a painful emotion, there are six steps I can take very quickly to break
my limiting patterns, find the benefit of that emotion, and set myself up so that in the future I can get
the lesson from the emotion and eliminate the pain more quickly. Let's examine them briefly.
STEP ONE
Identify What You're Really Feeling
So often people feel so overloaded they don't even know what they're feeling. All they know is that
they're being "attacked" by all these negative emotions and feelings. Instead of feeling overloaded,
step back for a moment and ask yourself, "What am I really feeling right now?" If you think at first,
"I'm feeling angry," begin to ask yourself, "Am I really feeling angry? Or is it something else? Maybe
what I'm really feeling is hurt. Or I feel like I've lost out on something." Realize that a feeling of hurt
or a feeling of loss is not as intense as the feeling of anger. Just in taking a moment to identify what
you're really feeling, and beginning to question your emotions, you may be able to lower the emotional
intensity you're experiencing, and therefore deal with the situation much more quickly and easily.
If, for example, you say, "Right now I feel rejected," you might ask yourself, "Am I feeling rejected, or
am I feeling a sense of separation from a person I love? Am I feeling rejected, or am I feeling
disappointed! Am I feeling rejected, or am I feeling a little uncomfortable?" Remember the power of
Transformational Vocabulary to immediately lower your intensity. Again, as you identify what you're
really feeling, you can lower the intensity even more, which makes it much easier to learn from the
emotion.
STEP TWO
Acknowledge and Appreciate Your Emotions,
Knowing They Support You
You never want to make your emotions wrong. The idea that anything you feel is "wrong" is a great
way to destroy honest communication with yourself as well as with others. Be thankful that there's a
part of your brain that is sending you a signal of support, a call to action to make a change in either
your perception of some aspect of your life or in your actions. If you're willing to trust your emotions,
knowing that even though you don't understand them at the moment, each and every one you
experience is there to support you in making a positive change, you will immediately stop the war you
once had with yourself. Instead, you'll feel yourself moving toward simple solutions. Making an
emotion "wrong" will rarely cause it to become less intense. Whatever you resist tends to persist.
Cultivate the feeling of appreciation for all emotions, and like a child that needs attention, you'll find
your emotions "calming down" almost immediately.

STEP THREE
Get Curious about the Message This
Emotion Is Offering You
Remember the power of changing emotional states? If you put yourself in a state of mind where you
truly are feeling curious about learning something, this is an immediate pattern interrupt to any
emotion and enables you to learn a great deal about yourself. Getting curious helps you master your
emotion, solve the challenge, and prevent the same problem from occurring in the future. As you
begin to feel the emotion, get curious about what it really has to offer you. What do you need to do
right now to make things better? If you're feeling lonely, for example, get curious and ask, "Is it
possible that I'm just misinterpreting the situation to mean that I'm alone, when in reality I have all
kinds of friends? If I just let them know I want to visit with them, wouldn't they love to visit with me
as well? Is my loneliness giving me a message that I need to take action, reach out more and
connect with people?" Here are four questions to ask yourself to become curious about your emotions:
What do I really want to feel?
What would I have to believe in order to feel the way I've been feeling?
What am I willing to do to create a solution and handle this right now?
What can I learn from this?
As you get curious about your emotions, you'll learn important distinctions about them, not only today,
but in the future as well.

STEP FOUR
Get Confident
Get confident that you can handle this emotion immediately. The quickest, simplest, and most
powerful way I know to handle any emotion is to remember a time when you felt a similar
emotion and realize that you've successfully handled this emotion before. Since you handled
it in the past, surely you can handle it again today. The truth is, if you've ever had this Action
Signal before and gotten through it, you already have a strategy of how to change your emotional
states.
So stop right now and think about that time when you felt the same emotions and how you dealt with
them in a positive way. Use this as the role model or checklist for what you can do right now to change
how you feel. What did you do back then? Did you change what you were focusing on, the questions
you asked yourself, your perceptions? Or did you take some kind of new action? Decide to do the same
right now, with the confidence that it will work just as it did before. If you're feeling depressed, for
example, and you've been able to turn it around before, ask yourself, "What did I do then?" Did you
take some new action like going for a run or making some phone calls? Once you've made some
distinctions about what you've done in the past, do the same things now, and you'll find that you’ll get
similar results.
STEP FIVE
Get Certain You Can Handle This Not Only Today,
But in the Future as Well
You want to feel certain that you can handle this emotion easily in the future by having a great plan to
do so. One way to do this is to simply remember the ways you've handled it in the past, and rehearse
handling situations where this Action Signal would come up in the future. See, hear, and feel yourself
handling the situation easily. Repetitions of this with emotional intensity will create within you a neural
pathway of certainty that you can easily deal with such challenges. In addition, jot down on a piece of
paper three or four other ways that you could change your perception when an Action Signal comes up,
or ways that you could change how you were communicating your feelings or needs, or ways that you
could change the actions you were taking in this particular situation.
STEP SIX
Get Excited, and Take Action
Now that you've finished the first five steps—identified what you were really feeling, appreciated the
emotion instead of fighting it, gotten curious about what it really meant and the lesson it was offering
you, learned from it, figured out how to turn things around by modeling your successful past strategies
for handling the emotion, and rehearsed dealing with it in future situations and installed a sense of
certainty—the final step is obvious: Get excited, and take action! Get excited about the fact that you
can easily handle this emotion, and take some action right away to prove that you've handled it. Don't
stay stuck in the limiting emotions you're having. Express yourself by using what you rehearsed
internally to create a change in your perceptions or your actions. Remember that the new distinctions
you've just made will change the way you feel not only today, but how you deal with this emotion in
the future.
With these six simple steps, you can master virtually any emotion that comes up in your life. If you
find yourself dealing with the same emotion again and again, this six-step method will help you
identify the pattern and change it in a very short period of time. So practice using this system. Like
anything else that's brand-new, at first this may seem cumbersome72. But the more you do it, the
easier it will become to use, and pretty soon you'll find yourself being able to navigate your way
through what you used to think were emotional minefields.
What you’ll see instead will be a field of personal coaches guiding you each step of the way, showing
you where you need to go to achieve your goals.
Remember, the best time to handle an emotion is when you first begin to feel it. It's much more
difficult to interrupt an emotional pattern once it's full-blown. My philosophy is, "Kill the monster while
it's little." Use this system quickly, as soon as the Action Signal makes itself known, and you’ll find
yourself being able to quickly handle virtually any emotion.

THE TEN ACTION SIGNALS
With the six steps alone, you can change most emotions. But in order to keep yourself from even
having to use the six steps, you may find it useful to have a conscious understanding of what positive
message each of your major emotions or Action Signals is trying to give you. In the next couple of
pages, I'll share with you the ten primary emotions most people try to avoid but which you will instead
use to drive yourself to action. Reading this list of Action Signals won't give you instant mastery of
your emotions. You've got to use these distinctions consistently in order to reap their benefits. I
suggest that you reread this section several times, underlining the areas that are especially significant
for you, and then write down the Action Signals on a 3 x 5 card you can carry with you everywhere,

72

cumbersome lästig, hinderlich; klobig
reminding yourself of the meaning the emotion really has for you and what action you can take to
utilize it. Attach one of these little cards to the sun visor in your car, not only so you can review it
throughout the day, but so if you get stuck in traffic and begin to "boil over in rage," you'll be able to
pull out the card and remind yourself of the positive nature of the messages you're receiving.
Let's begin with the most basic call to action, the emotion of ...
1. DISCOMFORT. Uncomfortable emotions don't have a tremendous amount of intensity, but they do
bother us and create the nagging sensation that things are not quite right.
The Message:
Boredom, impatience, unease, distress, or mild embarrassment are all sending you a
message that something is not quite right. Maybe the way you're perceiving things is off, or the
actions you're taking are not producing the results you want.
The Solution:
Dealing with emotions of discomfort is simple:
1) Use the skills you've already learned in this book to change your state;
2) Clarify what you do want; and
3) Refine your actions. Try a slightly different approach and see if you can't immediately
change the way you're feeling about the situation and/or change the quality of results
you're producing.
Like all emotions, if not dealt with, uncomfortable feelings will intensify. Discomfort is somewhat
painful, but the anticipation of possible emotional pain is much more intense than the discomfort you
might be feeling in the moment. You and I need to remember that our imagination can make things
ten times more intense than anything we could ever experience in real life. In fact, there's a saying in
chess and in martial arts: "The threat of attack is greater than the attack itself." When we begin to
anticipate pain, especially intense levels of it, often we begin to develop the Action Signal of ...
2. FEAR. Fearful emotions include everything from low levels of concern and apprehension to intense
worry, anxiety, fright, and even terror. Fear serves a purpose, and its message is simple.
The Message:
Fear is simply the anticipation that something that's going to happen soon needs to be
prepared for. In the words of the Boy Scout motto, "Be prepared." We need either to prepare to cope
with the situation, or to do something to change it. The tragedy is that most people either try to deny
their fear, or they wallow in it. Neither of these approaches is respecting the message that fear is
trying to deliver, so it will continue to pursue you as it tries to get its message across. You don't want
to surrender to fear and amplify it by starting to think of the worst that could happen, nor do you want
to pretend it's not there.
The Solution:
Review what you were feeling fearful about and evaluate what you must do to prepare yourself
mentally. Figure out what actions you need to take to deal with the situation in the best possible way.
Sometimes we've done all the preparation we could for something; there's nothing else we can do—but
we still sit around in fear. This is the point when you must use the antidote to fear: you must make a
decision to have faith, knowing you've done all you can to prepare for whatever you're fearing, and
that most fears in life rarely come to fruition. If they do, you may experience . . .
3. HURT. If there's any one emotion that seems to dominate human relationships, both personal and
professional, it's the emotion of hurt. Feelings of hurt are usually generated by a sense of loss.
When people are hurt, they often lash out at others. We need to hear the real message hurt gives us.
The Message:
The message the hurt signal gives us is that we have an expectation that has not been met.
Many times this feeling arises when we've expected somebody to keep their word and they didn't
(even if you didn't tell them your expectation that, for example, they not share with someone else
what you talked with them about). In this case, you feel a loss of intimacy with this person, maybe a
loss of trust. That sense of loss is what creates the feeling of hurt.
The Solution:
1) Realize that in reality you may not have lost anything. Maybe what you need to lose is the
false perception that this person is trying to wound or hurt you. Maybe they really don't realize the
impact of their actions on your life.
2) Secondly, take a moment and reevaluate the situation. Ask yourself, "Is there really loss here?
Or am I judging this situation too soon, or too harshly?"
3) A third solution that can help you get out of a sense of hurt is to elegantly and
appropriately communicate your feeling of loss to the person involved. Tell them, "The other
day when X-Y-Z happened, I misinterpreted that to mean that you didn't care, and I have a sense of
loss. Can you clarify for me what really happened?" Simply by changing your communication style and
clarifying what's really going on, you will often find that hurt disappears in a matter of moments.
However, if hurt is not dealt with, it often becomes amplified and turns into . . .
4. ANGER. Angry emotions include everything from being mildly irritated to being angry, resentful,
furious, or even enraged.
The Message:
The message of anger is that an important rule or standard that you hold for your life has been
violated by someone else, or maybe even by you. (We'll talk more about this in Chapter 16 on rules.)
When you get the message of anger, you need to understand that you can literally change this
emotion in a moment.
The Solution:
1) Realize that you may have misinterpreted the situation completely, that your anger about this
person breaking your rules may be based on the fact that they don't know what's most important to
you (even though you believe they should).
2) Realize that even if a person did violate one of your standards, your rules are not necessarily the
"right" rules, even though you feel as strongly as you do about them.
3) Ask yourself a more empowering question like "In the long run, is it true that this person really
cares about me?" Interrupt the anger by asking yourself, "What can I learn from this? How can I
communicate the importance of these standards I hold for myself to this person in a way that causes
them to want to help me, and not violate my standards again in the future?"
For example, if you're angry, change your perception—maybe this person really didn't know your rules.
Or change your procedure—maybe you didn't effectively communicate your real needs. Or change your
behavior—tell people up front, for example, "Hey, this is private. Please promise me you won't share
this with anybody; it's really important to me." For many people, consistent anger, or the failure to be
able to meet their own standards and rules, leads to ...
5. FRUSTRATION. Frustration can come from many avenues. Any time we feel like we're surrounded
by roadblocks in our lives, where we are continuously putting out effort but not receiving rewards, we
tend to feel the emotion of frustration.
The Message:

\

The message of frustration is an exciting signal. It means that your brain believes you could be doing
better than you currently are. Frustration is very different from disappointment, which is the feeling
that there's something you want in your life but you'll never get it. By contrast, frustration is a very
positive sign. It means that the solution to your problem is within range, but what you're currently
doing isn't working, and you need to change your approach in order to achieve your goal. It's a signal
for you to become more flexible! How do you deal with frustration?
The Solution:
1) Realize that frustration is your friend, and brainstorm new ways to get a result. How can you flex
your approach?
2) Get some input on how to deal with the situation. Find a role model, someone who has found a way
to get what you want. Ask them for input on how you might more effectively produce your desired
result.
3) Get fascinated by what you can learn that could help you handle this challenge not only today, but
in the future, in a way that consumes very little time or energy and actually creates joy. Much more
devastating than frustration, however, is the emotion of...
6. DISAPPOINTMENT. Disappointment can be a very destructive emotion if you don't deal with it
quickly. Disappointment is the devastating feeling of being "let down" or that you're going to miss out
on something forever. Anything that makes you feel sad or defeated as a result of expecting more
than you get is disappointing.
The Message:
The message disappointment offers you is that an expectation you have had—a goal you were really
going for—is probably not going to happen, so it's time to change your expectations to make them
more appropriate for this situation and take action to set and achieve a new goal immediately. And
that is the solution.
The Solution:
1) Immediately figure out something you can learn from this situation that could help you in the future
to achieve the very thing you were after in the first place.
2) Set a new goal, something that will be even more inspiring, and something you can make
immediate progress toward.
3) Realize that you may be judging too soon. Often the things you're disappointed about are only
temporary challenges, very much like in the story of Billy Joel in Chapter 2. As I've said, you and I
need to remember that God's delays are not God's denials. You may just be in what I call "lag time."
People often set themselves up for disappointment by having completely unrealistic expectations. If
you go out today and plant a seed, you can't go back tomorrow and expect to see a tree.
4) A fourth major solution to dealing with disappointment is to realize that a situation isn't over yet,
and develop more patience. Completely reevaluate what you truly want, and begin to develop an even
more effective plan for achieving it.
5) The most powerful antidote to the emotion of disappointment is cultivating an attitude of positive
expectancy about what will happen in the future, regardless of what has occurred in the past. The
ultimate disappointment that we can experience is usually expressed as the emotion of...
7. GUILT. The emotions of guilt, regret, and remorse are among the emotions human beings do most
to avoid in life, and this is valuable. They are painful emotions for us to experience, but they, too,
serve a valuable function, one which becomes apparent once we hear the message.
The Message:
Guilt tells you that you have violated one of your own highest standards, and that you must do
something immediately to ensure that you're not going to violate that standard again in the future. If
you recall, in Chapter 6 I said that leverage is accessed when someone begins to link pain to
something. With enough pain linked to a behavior, that person will eventually change it, and the
strongest leverage is the pain we can give ourselves. Guilt is the ultimate leverage for many people in
changing a behavior. However, some people try to deal with their guilt by denying and suppressing it.
Unfortunately, this rarely works. Guilt does not go away; it only comes back stronger.
The other extreme is to surrender to and wallow in guilt, where we begin to just accept the pain and
experience learned helplessness. This is not the purpose of guilt. It's designed, again, to drive us to
action to create a change. People tail to understand this and often feel so remorseful about something
they once did that they allow themselves to feel inferior for the rest of their lives! That is not the
message of guilt. It's there to make sure you either avoid behaviors out of your certainty that they'll
lead to guilt, or, if you've already violated your standard, it's there to induce enough pain within you to
get yourself to recommit to a higher standard once again. Once you address your old behavior that
you feel guilty about, though, and you're sincere and consistent, then move on.
The Solution:
1) Acknowledge that you have, in fact, violated a critical standard you hold for yourself.
2) Absolutely commit yourself to making sure this behavior will never happen again in the future.
Rehearse in your mind how, if you could live it again, you could deal with the same situation you feel
guilty about in a way that is consistent with your own highest personal standards. As you commit
beyond a shadow of a doubt that you'll never allow the behavior to occur again, you have the right to
let go of the guilt. Guilt has then served its purpose to drive you to hold a higher standard in the future.
Utilize it; don't wallow in it! Some people manage to beat themselves up mentally and emotionally
because they are constantly failing to meet standards that they hold for themselves in virtually every
area of life. As a result, most of these people experience a feeling of...
8. INADEQUACY. This feeling of unworthiness occurs anytime we feel we can't do something we
should be able to do. The challenge, of course, is that often we have a completely unfair rule for
determining whether we're inadequate or not. First, understand the message inadequacy is
giving you.
The Message:
The message is that you don't presently have a level of skill necessary for the task at hand. It's telling
you that you need more information, understanding, strategies, tools or confidence.
The Solution:
1) Simply ask yourself, "Is this really an appropriate emotion for me to feel in this situation? Am I
really inadequate, or do I have to change the way I'm perceiving things?" Maybe you've convinced
yourself that in order to feel adequate, you have to go out on the dance floor and outdo Michael
Jackson. This is probably an inappropriate perception.
If your feeling is justified, the message of inadequacy is that you need to find a way to do something
better than you've done it before. The solution in this case is also obvious:
2) Whenever you feel inadequate, appreciate the encouragement to improve. Remind yourself that
you're not "perfect," and that you don't need to be. With this realization, you can begin to feel
adequate the moment you decide to commit yourself to CANI!™—constant and never-ending
improvement in this area.
3) Find a role model—someone who's effective in the area in which you feel inadequate—and get some
coaching from them. Just the process of deciding to master this area of your life and making even the
smallest amount of progress will turn a person who's inadequate into a person who's learning. This
emotion is critical, because when someone feels inadequate, they tend to tall into the trap of learned
helplessness, and they begin to see the problem as being a permanent one with themselves. There's
no greater lie you could tell yourself. You're not inadequate. You may be untrained or unskilled in a
particular area, but you're not inadequate. The capability for greatness in anything is within you even
now.
When we begin to feel that problems are permanent or pervasive orwe have more things to deal with
than we can possibly imagine, we tend to succumb to the emotions of ...
9. OVERLOAD OR OVERWHEIM. Grief, depression, and helplessness are merely expressions of
feeling overloaded or overwhelmed. Grief happens when you feel like there is no empowering meaning
for something that has happened, or that your life is being negatively impacted by people, events, or
forces that are outside your control. People in this state become overwhelmed and often begin to feel
that nothing can change the situation, that the problem is too big—it's permanent, pervasive, and
personal. People go into these emotional states whenever they perceive their world in a way that
makes them feel like there's more going on than they can possibly deal with, i.e., the pace, amount, or
intensity of sensations seems overwhelming.
The Message:
The message of being overwhelmed is that you need to reevaluate what's most important to you in
this situation. The reason you're overloaded is that you're trying to deal with too many things at once,
and you're trying to change everything overnight. The feeling of being overloaded or overwhelmed
disrupts and destroys more people's lives than just about any other emotion.
The Solution:
1) Decide, out of all the things you're dealing with in your life, what the absolute, most important thing
is for you to focus on.
2) Now write down all the things that are most important for you to accomplish and put them in an
order of priority. Just putting them down on paper will allow you to begin to feel a sense of control
over what's going on.
3) Tackle the first thing on your list, and continue to take action until you've mastered it. As soon as
you've mastered one particular area, you'll begin to develop momentum. Your brain will begin to
realize that you are in control and you are not overloaded, overwhelmed, or depressed, that the
problem is not permanent, and that you can always come up with a solution.
4) When you feel that it's appropriate to start letting go of an overwhelming emotion like grief, start
focusing on what you can control and realize that there must be some empowering meaning to it all,
even though you can't comprehend it yet. Our self-esteem is often tied to our ability to control our
environments. When we create an environment inside our minds that has too many intense and
simultaneous demands upon us, of course we'll feel overloaded. But we also have the power to change
this by focusing on what we can control and dealing with it a step at a time. Probably the emotion that
most people fear the most, however, is that feeling of disconnection, also known as ...
10. LONELINESS. Anything that makes us feel alone, apart, or separate from others belongs in this
category. Have you ever felt really lonely? I don't think there's anybody alive who hasn't.
The Message:
The message of loneliness is that you need a connection with people. But what does the message
mean? People often assume it means a sexual connection, or instant intimacy. Then they feel
frustrated, because even when they do have intimacy, they still feel lonely.
The Solution:
1) The solution to loneliness is to realize that you can reach out and make a connection immediately
and end the loneliness. There are caring people everywhere.
2) Identify what kind of connection you do need. Do you need an intimate connection? Maybe
you just need some basic friendship, or someone to listen to you or to laugh or talk with. You simply
have to identify what your true needs are.
3) Remind yourself that what's great about being lonely is that it means, "I really care about people,
and I love to be with them. I need to find out what kind of connection I need with somebody right now,
and then take an action immediately to make that happen."
4) Then, take immediate action to reach out and connect with someone.
So there's your list of the ten Action Signals. As you can see, every one of these emotions is offering
you empowering messages and a call to change either your false and disempowering perceptions or
your inappropriate procedures, that is, your communication style or actions. To fully utilize this list,
remember to review it several times, and with each repetition, look for and underline the positive
messages that each signal is giving you, as well as the solutions you can use in the future. Almost all
"negative" emotions have their basis in these ten categories or are some hybrid of them. But you can
deal with any emotion in the way we discussed earlier: by going through the six steps, getting curious,
and discovering the empowering meaning it's offering you.
"We must cultivate our garden."
VOLTAIRE
Think of your mind, your emotions, and your spirit as the ultimate garden. The way to ensure a
bountiful, nourishing harvest is to plant seeds like love, warmth, and appreciation, instead of seeds like
disappointment, anger, and fear. Begin to think of those Action Signals as weeds in your garden. A
weed is a call to action, isn't it? It says, "You've got to do something; you've got to pull this out to
make room for better, healthier plants to grow." Keep cultivating the kinds of plants you want, and
pull the weeds as soon as you notice them.
Let me offer you ten emotional seeds you can plant in your garden. If you nurture these seeds by
focusing on feeling what you want to feel every day, you will hold yourself to a standard of greatness.
These seeds create a life that flourishes and fulfills its highest potential. Let's explore them briefly now,
and realize that each of these emotions represents an antidote to any of the "negative" emotions you
may have been feeling previously.

THE TEN EMOTIONS OF POWER
1. LOVE AND WARMTH. The consistent expression of love seems to be able to melt almost any
negative emotions it comes in contact with. If someone is angry with you, you can easily remain loving
with them by adopting a core belief such as this marvelous one from the book A Course in Miracles: all
communication is either a loving response or a cry for help. If someone comes to you in a state
of hurt or anger, and you consistently respond to them with love and warmth, eventually their state
will change and their intensity will melt away.
"If you could only love enough, you could be the most powerful person in the world."
EMMET FOX
2. APPRECIATION AND GRATITUDE. I believe that all of the most powerful emotions are some
expression of love, each directed in different ways. For me, appreciation and gratitude are two of the
most spiritual emotions, actively expressing through thought and action my appreciation and love for
all the gifts that life has given me, that people have given me, that experience has given me. Living in
this emotional state will enhance your life more than almost anything I know of. Cultivating this is
cultivating life. Live with an attitude of gratitude.
3. CURIOSITY. If you really want to grow in your life, learn to be as curious as a child. Children know
how to wonder—that's why they're so endearing73. If you want to cure boredom, be curious. If you're
curious, nothing is a chore74; it's automatic—you want to study. Cultivate curiosity, and life becomes
an unending study of joy.
4. EXCITEMENT AND PASSION. Excitement and passion can add juice to anything. Passion can turn
any challenge into a tremendous opportunity. Passion is unbridled power to move our lives forward at
a faster tempo than ever before. To paraphrase Benjamin Disraeli, man is only truly great when he
acts from the passions. How do we "get" passion? The same way we "get" love, warmth, appreciation,
gratefulness, and curiosity—we decide to feel it! Use your physiology: speak more rapidly, visualize
images more rapidly, move your body in the direction you want to go. Don't just casually sit and think.
You can't be filled with passion if you're slumping over your desk, breathing shallowly, and slurring
your speech.
5. DETERMINATION. All of the above emotions are invaluable, but there is one that you must have if
you're going to create lasting value in this world. It will dictate how you deal with upsets and
challenges, with disappointment and disillusionments. Determination means the difference between
being stuck and being struck with the lightning power of commitment. If you want to get yourself to
lose weight, make those business calls, or follow through on anything, "pushing" yourself won't do it.
Putting yourself in a state of determination will. All your actions will spring from that source, and you'll
just automatically do whatever it takes to accomplish your aim. Acting with determination means
making a congruent, committed decision where you've cut off any other possibility.
"Determination is the wake-up call to the human will."
ANTHONY ROBBINS
With determination, you can accomplish anything. Without it, you're doomed to frustration and
disappointment. Our willingness to do whatever it takes, to act in spite of fear, is the basis of
courage. And courage is the foundation from which determination is born. The difference between
feeling accomplishment75 or feeling despondency is the cultivation of the emotional muscle of
determination. With all that determination at your command, though, be sure you can also break your

73
74
75

endearing gewinnend; liebenswert
chore Am. schwierige oder unangenehme Aufgabe; chores Hausarbeit
accomplishment Fähigkeit, Talent
own pattern and change your approach. Why smash through a wall if you can just look a little to your
left and find a door? Sometimes determination can be a limitation; you need to cultivate . . .
6. FLEXIBILITY. If there's one seed to plant that will guarantee success, it's the ability to change
your approach. In fact, all those Action Signals—those things you used to call negative emotions—are
just messages to be more flexible! Choosing to be flexible is choosing to be happy. Throughout your
life there will be times when there are things you will not be able to control, and your ability to be
flexible in your rules, the meaning you attach to things, and your actions will determine your long-term
success or failure, not to mention your level of personal joy. The reed that bends will survive the
windstorm, while the mighty oak tree will crack. If you cultivate all of the above emotions, then you'll
surely develop . ..
7. CONFIDENCE. Unshakable confidence is the sense of certainty we all want. The only way you can
consistently experience confidence, even in environments and situations you've never previously
encountered, is through the power of faith. Imagine and feel certain about the emotions you deserve
to have now, rather than wait for them to spontaneously appear someday in the far distant future.
When you're confident, you're willing to experiment, to put yourself on the line. One way to develop
faith and confidence is simply to practice using it. If I were to ask whether you're confident that you
can tie your own shoes, I'm sure you could tell me with perfect confidence that you can. Why? Only
because you've done it thousands of times! So practice confidence by using it consistently, and you'll
be amazed at the dividends it reaps in every area of your life.
In order to get yourself to do anything, it's imperative to exercise confidence rather than fear. The
tragedy of many people's lives is that they avoid doing things because they're afraid; they even feel
bad about things in advance. But remember: the source of success for outstanding achievers often
finds its origin in a set of nurtured beliefs for which that individual had no references! The ability to act
on faith is what moves the human race forward. Another emotion you'll automatically experience once
you've succeeded in cultivating all the above is ...
8. CHEERFULNESS. When I added cheerfulness to my list of most important values, people
commented, "There's something different about you. You seem so happy." I realized that I had been
happy, but I hadn't told my face about it! There's a big difference between being happy on the inside,
and being outwardly cheerful. Cheerfulness enhances your self-esteem, makes life more fun, and
makes the people around you feel happier as well. Cheerfulness has the power to eliminate the
feelings of fear, hurt, anger, frustration, disappointment, depression, guilt, and inadequacy from your
life. You've achieved cheerfulness the day you realize that no matter what's happening around you,
being anything other than cheerful will not make it better.
Being cheerful does not mean that you're Pollyanna or that you look at the world through rose-colored
glasses and refuse to acknowledge challenges. Being cheerful means you're incredibly intelligent
because you know that if you live life in a state of pleasure—one that's so intense that you transmit a
sense of joy to those around you—you can have the impact to meet virtually any challenge that comes
your way. Cultivate cheerfulness, and you won't need so many of those "painful" Action Signals to get
your attention! Make it easy for yourself to feel cheerful by planting the seed of...
9. VITALITY. Handling this area is critical. If you don't take care of your physical body, it's more
difficult to be able to enjoy these emotions. Make sure that physical vitality is available; remember
that all emotions are directed through your body. If you're feeling out of sorts emotionally, you need to
look at the basics. How are you breathing? When people are stressed, they stop breathing, sapping
their vitality. Learning to breathe properly is the most important avenue toward good health. Another
critical element to physical vitality is ensuring that you have an abundant level of nerve energy.
How do you do this? Realize that day to day you're expending nerve energy through your actions, and
as obvious as it sounds, you do need to make sure that you rest and recharge. By the way, how much
sleep are you getting? If you're regularly logging eight to ten hours of sack time, you're probably
getting too much sleep! Six to seven hours has been found to be optimum for most people. Contrary to
popular belief, sitting still doesn't preserve energy. The truth is, that's usually when you feel most tired.
The human nervous system needs to move to have energy. To a certain extent, expending energy
gives you a greater sense of energy. As you move, oxygen flows through your system, and that
physical level of health creates the emotional sense of vitality that can help you to deal with virtually
any negative challenge you could have in your life, So realize that a sense of vitality is a critical
emotion to cultivate in order to handle virtually any emotions that come up in your life, not
to mention the critical resource in experiencing consistent passion. Once your garden is filled with
these powerful emotions, then you can share your bounty through . . .
10. CONTRIBUTION. Years ago, I remember being in one of the toughest times in my life, driving
down the freeway in the middle of the night. I kept asking, "What do I need to do to turn my life
around?" Suddenly an insight came to me, accompanied by such intense emotion that I was compelled
to pull my car off the road immediately and write down one key phrase in my journal: "The secret to
living is giving."
There's no richer emotion I know of in life than the sense that who you are as a person, something
you've said or done, has added to more than just your own life, that somehow it has enhanced life's
experience for someone you care about, or maybe someone you don't even know. The stories that
move me most profoundly are about people who follow the highest spiritual emotion of caring
unconditionally and acting for others' benefit. When I saw the musical Les Miserables, I was deeply
moved by the character of Jean Valjean, because he was such a good man who wanted to give so
much to others. Each day we should cultivate that sense of contribution by focusing not only on
ourselves, but on others as well.
Don't fall into the trap, though, of trying to contribute to others at your own expense—playing the
martyr won't give you a true sense of contribution. But if you can consistently give to yourself
and others on a measurable scale that allows you to know that your life has mattered, you'll have a
sense of connection with people and a sense of pride and self-esteem that no amount of money,
accomplishments, fame, or acknowledgment could ever give. A sense of contribution makes all of life
worthwhile. Imagine what a better world it would be if all of us cultivated a sense of contribution!
THE TEN ACTION SIGNALS
1. DISCOMFORT
2. FEAR
3. HURT
4. ANGER
5. FRUSTRATION
6. DISAPPOINTMENT
7. GUILT
8. INADEQUACY
9. OVERLOAD, OVERWHELM
10. LONELINESS
THE TEN EMOTIONS OF POWER
1. LOVE AND WARMTH
2. APPRECIATION AND GRATITUDE
3. CURIOSITY
4. EXCITEMENT AND PASSION
5. DETERMINATION
6. FLEXIBIUTY
7. CONFIDENCE
8. CHEERFULNESS
9. VITALITY
10. CONTRIBUTION
Plant these emotions daily, and watch your whole life grow with a vitality that you've never
dreamed of before. Here, for review, are the ten Action Signals and the ten Emotions of Power. I
cannot emphasize strongly enough the importance of learning to use the negative emotions for what
they are—calls to action—and committing to cultivate the positive emotions. Do you remember the 3"
x 5" card you created on which you wrote down all the messages and solutions your Action Signals are
giving you? Review it frequently throughout the day. As you view it even now, you may notice that the
positive emotions we've just covered are great antidotes to the Action Signals. In other words, if
you're feeling uncomfortable emotion, then love and warmth will make changing that emotion much
simpler. If you're feeling fearful, then a sense of gratitude wipes that emotion out. If you're feeling
hurt and then get curious about what's going on, that replaces the sense of hurt. If you're feeling
angry and you turn that emotional intensity into directed excitement and passion, think of what you
can accomplish! Frustration can be broken through with the use of determination. Disappointment can
be dissolved by being flexible in your approach. Guilt disappears the minute you become confident that
you're going to stick to your new standards. Inadequacy departs when you're feeling cheerful; there's
simply no room for it. A sense of overload disappears with a sense of personal power and vitality.
Loneliness melts away the moment you figure out how to contribute to others.
I'd now like you to do an assignment that will fully associate you to the simple and powerful tool of
emotions.
1) Over the next two days, any time you feel a disempowering or negative emotion, follow the
six steps to emotional mastery. Identify what category it belongs in, and recognize its value in
giving you the message that you need. Discover whether what needs to be changed are your
perceptions or your actions. Get confident, get certain, and get excited.
2) Action Signals serve an important function, but if you didn't have to feel them as often, wouldn't
that be preferable? In addition to the Emotions of Power, cultivate global beliefs that help
minimize your experience of the negative emotions. For example, I've eliminated the feeling of
abandonment (loneliness) from my life because I've adopted the belief that I can never really be
abandoned. If someone I love ever tried to "abandon" me, I'd just follow them! (Other empowering
beliefs include, "This, too, shall pass"; "Love is the only must in my life; everything else is a should";
and "There's always a way, if I'm committed.")
Utilize these Emotions of Power daily, and use the six steps to emotional mastery to transform your
Action Signals into positive action. Remember: Every feeling that you have—good or bad—is based on
your interpretation of what things mean. Whenever you start to feel bad, ask yourself this question:
"What else could this mean?" It's the first step toward taking control of your emotions.
What I hope you'll take from this chapter is an appreciation of all your emotions and a sense of
excitement that they're all providing you with a chance to learn something to make your life better,
literally at a moment's notice. Never again do you need to feel that painful emotions are your enemies.
They're all here to serve you as a signal that some kind of change is needed. As you refine your ability
to use these Action Signals, you'll start handling them up front, when they are small, rather than
waiting until they turn into full-blown crises. For instance, you'll handle a situation while it's still
annoying, not infuriating—like handling a weight problem when you notice the first extra pound rather
than waiting until you've added another thirty.
Over the next couple of weeks, focus on enjoying the process of learning from all of your emotions.
You can experience the whole kaleidoscope at any moment you choose. Don't be afraid—ride the roller
coaster! Experience the joy, passion, and thrill of all the emotions, and know that you're in control! It's
your life, your emotions, your destiny. One thing I have found is that although someone may know
how to do something, they might still not apply what they know. What we really need is a reason to
use the power of our decisions, to change our beliefs, to get leverage on ourselves and interrupt our
patterns, to ask better questions and sensitize ourselves to our vocabulary and metaphors. In
order to be motivated on a consistent basis, we need to develop .. .
12
THE
MAGNIFICENT OBSESSION CREATING A COMPELLING FUTURE
"Nothing happens unless first a dream."
CARL SANDBURG
Are you ready now to have some fun? Are you willing to be like a kid again and let your imagination
run wild? Are you committed to grabbing hold of your life and squeezing from it all the power, passion,
and "juice" you know can be yours?
I've thrown a lot at you so far. We've covered a monumental amount of material in the previous
chapters, most of which you can put to use immediately. Some of it, however, will stay tucked away in
a comer of your brain, locked in deep storage until just the right moment. We've worked hard together
to get you in the position to make new decisions, decisions that can make the difference between a
life of dreaming and a life of doing.
Many people in life know what they should do, but they never do it. The reason is that they're lacking
the drive that only a compelling future can provide. This chapter is your opportunity to let go and
dream at the highest level, to brainstorm out the wildest possibilities and, in so doing, to possibly
discover something that will really push your life to the next level. It will help you create energy and
momentum.
If you read this chapter actively instead of passively, if you do the exercises and take action, then the
following pages will reward you with a vision for your future that will pull you like a magnet through
your toughest times. It's a chapter I'm sure you'll love returning to again and again anytime you need
renewed inspiration for your life. This is your chance to really have some fun and experience your true
passion!
What I'm going to ask you to do in the next few pages is to unlock your imagination, throw all
"common sense" to the wind, and act as if you're a kid again—a kid who can literally have anything he
wants, a kid who has only to express his heart's desire, and it will instantly be his. Do you remember
the Arabian tales known collectively as The Thousand and One Nights? Can you guess what my favorite
story was? That's right: Aladdin's Lamp. I think all of us, at one time or another, have longed to get
our hands on that magic lamp. All you have to do is rub it, and a mighty genie appears in order to
carry out your wishes. I'm here to tell you that you possess a lamp that is not limited to a
mere three wishes!
Now it's time for you to grab hold of this powerful force within you. Once you decide to awaken this
giant, you'll be unstoppable in creating mental, emotional, physical, financial, and spiritual abundance
beyond your wildest fantasies. Whether your dreams materialize instantly or take shape gradually over
time, know that the only limit to what you can have in your life is the size of your imagination and the
level of your commitment to making it real.

GIANT GOALS PRODUCE GIANT MOTIVATION
So often I hear people say, "Tony, where do you get your energy? With all that intensity, no wonder
you're so successful. I just don't have your drive; I guess I'm not motivated. I guess I'm lazy." My
usual response is, "You're not lazy! You just have impotent goals!"
Frequently I get a confused look to this response, at which point I explain that my level of excitement
and drive comes from my goals. Every morning when I wake up, even if I feel physically exhausted
from a lack of sleep, I'll still find the drive I need because my goals are so exciting to me. They get me
up early, keep me up late, and inspire me to marshal my resources and use everything I can possibly
find within the sphere of my influence to bring them to fruition. The same energy and sense of mission
is available to you now, but it will never be awakened by puny goals. The first step is to develop bigger,
more inspiring, more challenging goals.
Often people tell me, "My problem is that I really don't have any goals." This belief demonstrates their
lack of understanding of how goals really work. The human mind is always pursuing something, if
nothing more than the ability to reduce or eliminate pain, or avoid anything that could lead to it. Our
brains also love to guide us in pursuing anything that can lead to the creation of pleasure. We all have
goals. The problem, as I've stressed in virtually every chapter so far, is that we are unconscious in
our use of these resources.
Most people's goals are to "pay their lousy bills," to get by, to survive, to make it through the day—in
short, they are caught up in the trap of making a living rather than designing a life. Do you think
these goals will give you the power to tap the vast reserve of power within you? Hardly! You and I
must remember that our goals affect us, whatever they are. If we don't consciously plant the seeds we
want in the gardens of our minds, we'll end up with weeds! Weeds are automatic; you don't have to
work to get them. If we want to discover the unlimited possibilities within us, we must find a goal big
enough and grand enough to challenge us to push beyond our limits and discover our true potential.
Remember that your current conditions do not reflect your ultimate potential, but rather the size and
quality of goals upon which you currently are focusing. We all must discover or create a Magnificent
Obsession.

GOALS TAKE YOU BEYOND YOUR LIMITS TO A WORLD OF UNLIMITED POWER
When we first set large goals, they may seem impossible to achieve. But the most important key to
goal setting is to find a goal big enough to inspire you, something that will cause you to unleash your
power. The way I usually know I've set the right goal is when it seems impossible but at the same time
it's giving me a sense of crazed excitement just to think about the possibility of achieving it. In order
to truly find that inspiration and achieve those impossible goals, we must suspend our belief systems
about what we're capable of achieving.
I'll never forget the true story of a young boy born into poverty in a run-down section of San Francisco
and how his goals seemed impossible to everyone except him. This young man was a fan of football
legend Jim Brown, then the running back for the Cleveland Browns. In spite76 of the fact that this boy
was crippled by rickets77 he had endured as a result of malnutrition, and at the age of six his legs had
become permanently bowed and his calves78 so atrophied that his nickname was "Pencil Legs," he set
a goal to one day become a star running back like his hero. He had no money to attend football games,
so whenever the Browns played the 49ers he would wait outside the stadium until the maintenance
crew opened the gate late in the fourth quarter. He would then hobble into the stadium and soak up
the balance of the game.
Finally, at the age of thirteen, the boy had an encounter he'd dreamed of his whole life. He walked into
an ice cream parlor after a 49ers game against the Browns, and whom should he see but his long-time
idol! He approached the football star and said, "Mr. Brown, I'm your biggest fan!" Graciously, Brown
thanked him. The young boy persisted. "Mr. Brown, you know what?" Brown turned to him again and
said, "What is it, son?" The young boy said, "I know every record you've ever set, every touchdown
you've ever scored!" Jim Brown smiled and said, "That's great," and returned to his conversation. The
young man persisted, "Mr. Brown! Mr. Brown!" Jim Brown turned to him yet again. This time the
young man stared deep into his eyes with a passion so intense Brown could feel it and said, "Mr.
Brown, one day I'm going to break every one of your records!"
The football legend smiled and said, "That's great, kid. What's your name?" The boy grinned from ear
to ear and said, "Orenthal, sir. Orenthal James Simpson ... My friends call me O.J."
"We are what and where we are because we have first imagined it."
DONALD CURTIS
O.J. Simpson did indeed go on to break all of Jim Brown's records, and set some new ones of his own!
How do goals create this incredible power to shape destiny? How can they take a young boy afflicted
with rickets and allow him to become a legend? Setting goals is the first step in turning the
invisible into the visible—the foundation for all success in life. It's as if infinite Intelligence will
fill any mold you create using the impression of your intensely emotional thoughts. In other words, you
can chisel your own existence by the thoughts you consistently project every moment of your life. The
conception of your goals is the master plan that guides all thought.
Will you create a masterpiece or interpret life through the paintings of others? Will you put out a
thimble to collect your life's experiences or a giant rain barrel? The answers to these questions have
already been given by the goals you consistently seek.
76
spite Bosheit, Gehässigkeit; out of oder from pure spite aus reiner Bosheit; in spite of trotz; 2. jemanden
ärgern
77
rickets MEDIZIN Singular Rachitis
78
calf 1(Plural calves ) Wade
TURNING THE INVISIBLE INTO THE VISIBLE
Look around yourself right now. What do you see? Are you sitting on a sofa, surrounded by fine art or
watching a big-screen television employing the latest technology of laser disc? Or are you seated at a
desk that holds a telephone, computer, and fax machine? All of these objects were once just ideas in
someone's mind. If I had told you 100 years ago that invisible waves from around the world could be
pulled from the air and fed into a box to generate sounds and pictures, wouldn't you have considered
me crazy? Yet today just about every home in America has at least one television set (the average is
two!). Someone had to create them, and in order for that to happen, someone had to envision
them with clarity.
Is this true only of material objects? No, it also applies to all kinds of activities and processes: the
reason a car works is that some enterprising individuals figured out how to harness the process of
internal combustion. The answer to our current energy challenges will lie in the imagination and
resourcefulness of today's physicists and engineers. And the resolution to our social crises, like the
alarming spread of racial hate groups, homelessness, and hunger, can only be addressed with the
inventiveness and compassion of dedicated individuals like you and me.

WHY DOESN'T EVERYONE SET GOALS?
You might be thinking right now, "Well, this all sounds so inspirational, but surely just setting a goal
doesn't make it happen." I couldn't agree with you more. All goal setting must be immediately
followed by both the development of a plan, and massive and consistent action toward its
fulfillment. You already have this power to act. If you haven't been able to summon it, it's merely
because you have failed to set goals that inspire you.
What's holding you back? Surely you've been exposed to the power of goal setting before reading this
book. But do you have a list of clearly defined goals for the results you will absolutely produce in your
life mentally, emotionally, physically, spiritually, and financially? What has stopped you? For many it's
the unconscious fear of disappointment. Some people have set goals in the past and failed to achieve
them and, as a result of their disappointment and their tear of future pain, they stop setting goals.
They don't want to have any expectations that could be dashed. Other people set goals, but abuse
themselves by tying their entire level of personal happiness to their ability to achieve goals that may
be outside their control. Or they lack the flexibility to notice that as they move in the direction of their
goals, there are better, more worthy goals all around them.
The process of setting goals works a lot like your eyesight. The closer you get to your destination, the
greater clarity you gain, not only on the goal itself, but the details of everything around it. Who knows?
You may decide that you like one of those other possibilities even better, that it inspires you even
calf 2(Plural calves ) Kalb
more, and go for that one instead! In fact, sometimes, as we'll talk about in more depth later, failing
to achieve your goal actually draws you closer to your life's true purpose.
The drive to achieve and contribute comes in many forms. For some people it's spawned by
disappointment or even tragedy. For others it's fueled simply by the stark79 realization one day that life
is passing them by, that the quality of their life is lessening with each passing moment. For some,
inspiration is the source of their motivation. Seeing what's possible, anticipating the best possible
scenario, or realizing that they're in fact making significant progress can help them to develop
tremendous momentum to accomplish even more.
Often, we don't realize how far we've come because we're so caught up in the process of achieving. A
good metaphor for this is when a friend tells you how much your son or daughter has grown, and you
say with honest surprise, "Really?" It's been happening right under your nose, so you've failed to
notice it. It's even tougher to see your own growth, so I'd like to share with you a simple process.
Please take a moment to do it right now. It will assist you in tapping one or both of the abovedescribed forces of motivation.

YESTERDAY, TODAY, AND TOMORROW
Sometimes it's easy to lose track of just how far you've already come—or just how far you still need to
go in life. Use the following pages to make an accurate assessment of where you stood in these ten
critical areas five years ago. Specifically, next to each of these categories, give yourself a score on a
scale from 0 to 10, 0 meaning you had nothing in this area, and 10 meaning you were absolutely living
your life's desire in that category.
The second step, after giving yourself a score, is to write a sentence next to each category to describe
what you were like back then. For instance, five years ago, what were you like physically? You might
write down, "I was a 7," and then follow up with, "I was in fairly good shape, but definitely needed
improvement. Five pounds overweight, was running twice a week, but still didn't eat healthfully.
Mediocre levels of energy."
Take five to ten minutes and do this exercise now. You will find it quite enlightening!

79
stark 1. Adjektiv nackt (Tatsachen und so weiter); !! nicht stark; be in stark contrast to in krassem Gegensatz
stehen zu; 2. Adverb umgangssprachlich: stark naked splitternackt
Five Years Ago

Score

Sentence

Physically

_____

________________________________________

Mentally

_____

________________________________________

Emotionally

_____

________________________________________

Attractiveness

_____

________________________________________

Relationships

_____

________________________________________

Living environment

_____

________________________________________

Socially

_____

________________________________________

Spiritually

_____

________________________________________

Career

_____

________________________________________

Financially

_____

________________________________________

Creating a Compelling Future

_____

________________________________________
Now, for contrast's sake, let's see how far you've come, or failed to come, in each of these categories.
Answer the same questions based on today. In other words, first give yourself a score of 1 to 10 of
where you are today in each of these categories, and then write a sentence or two
describing what you're like in each of these categories today.
Today

Score

Sentence

Physically

_____

________________________________________

Mentally

_____

________________________________________

Emotionally

_____

________________________________________

Attractiveness

_____

________________________________________

Relationships

_____

________________________________________

Living environment

_____

________________________________________

Socially

_____

________________________________________

Spiritually

_____

________________________________________

Career

_____

________________________________________

Financially

_____

________________________________________

Creating a Compelling Future

_____

________________________________________
What have you learned by doing this so far? What distinctions have you made? Have you improved
more than you realized in some categories? Have you come a long way? That feels great, doesn't it? If
you haven't come as far as you would have liked, or if you think that you were doing better five years
ago than you are now in some areas, that's a great message, too—one that may drive you to make
changes before many more years pass you by. Remember, dissatisfaction can be a major key to
success.
Take a moment now and jot down a few key phrases describing what you've learned by this
comparison:
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________

Now complete the exercise by projecting five years into the future. Again, give yourself a score and a
sentence describing what you'll be like in each of these key categories.
Today

Score

Sentence

Physically

_____

________________________________________

Mentally

_____

________________________________________

Emotionally

_____

________________________________________

Attractiveness

_____

________________________________________

Relationships

_____

________________________________________

Living environment

_____

________________________________________

Socially

_____

________________________________________

Spiritually

_____

________________________________________

Career

_____

________________________________________

Financially

_____

________________________________________

Creating a Compelling Future

_____

________________________________________
THE KEY TO ACHIEVING GOALS
When you set a goal, you've committed to CANI! You've acknowledged the need that all human
beings have for constant, never-ending improvement. There is power in the pressure of dissatisfaction,
in the tension of temporary discomfort. This is the kind of pain you want in your life, the kind of pain
that you immediately transform into positive new actions.
This kind of pressure is known as eustress as opposed to distress. Eustress can be a driving, positive
force that pushes you forward to constantly increase the quality of your life for yourself and all those
you have the privilege to touch. Ponder it; use it to spur you forward. Many people try to avoid
pressure, yet the absence of any tension or pressure usually creates a sense of boredom and the
lackluster80 experience of life that so many people complain about. In truth, when we feel excited, we
feel a sense of pressure or tension within ourselves. However, the level of stress is not overwhelming,
but rather stimulating.
There is a difference between being stressed out and being the master of stress. Use stress (eustress)
to drive you in the direction you desire; it can generate tremendous transformation within you. By
learning to utilize pressure and make it your friend instead of your foe, you can truly hone it into a tool
that assists you in living life to the fullest. Besides, we need to remember that our stress level is self
induced. So let's induce it intelligently.
One of the simplest ways you can use pressure as your ally is to enlist the people you respect as you
commit to achieve your goals. By publicly declaring that you'll do whatever it takes to achieve your
deepest and truest desires, you will find it more difficult to stray from your path when frustration or
challenge set in. Often when you become tired or uncertain, and you begin to feel like things aren't
working out, memories of your public announcement may keep you going, or your friends will assist
you by holding you to a higher standard. You may find this a useful tool to help you continue on the
road even when it gets a little bumpy.

FAILING TO ACHIEVE YOUR GOAL CAN MEAN ACHIEVING YOUR REAL GOALS
Years ago, a friend approached me and talked about a fantasy he had of living on an island paradise in
Fiji. I had heard the dream many times and loved the concept in principle. But I was a practical man:
getting an island paradise in Fiji was purely an opportunity for investment, and I justified to myself
that if the world ever went through some cataclysm, it would be a great place for my family to escape
to. So I scheduled a "business trip/vacation," and arranged to go with Becky to examine several
properties in the islands to assess whether they might be a viable investment.
It took us a couple of days to start letting go of the hectic agendas we'd brought with us. But nothing
was going to stop us from achieving our goal of purchasing some raw land. We were on a mission to

80

lackluster Am. glanzlos, matt
find a sound investment, so we decided to charter a plane and explore the remote outer islands of Fiji
in search of a sterling opportunity.
We spent an adventurous day, landing in several places including the "Blue Lagoon" (from the film of
the same name) before finally landing on a secluded beach in the northern group of islands. We rented
the only car available and drove up a coconut-strewn dirt road known as the "Hibiscus Highway" for
the next three hours.
Then, in what seemed like the middle of nowhere, on the side of the road we spotted a little Fijian girl
with unusual red hair that stuck straight out from her head. Becky and I were delighted and wanted to
take her picture, but also wanted to be respectful to her. So we searched for her parents to ask their
permission before doing so,
As we began to look for her home, we spotted a tiny village on the edge of the sea. As we approached,
several villagers spotted us, and a large Fijian man came running in our direction. With a huge smile
he greeted us, not in some tribal tongue, but in the Queen's English. "Hi, my name is Joe," he said in a
booming voice. "Please come join us for some kava." As we entered the village, we were greeted by
what seemed like endless smiles and laughter. I was invited into a large hut filled with thirty Fijian
men to participate in a kava ceremony, and Becky was invited to stay outside and talk with the women
as was traditional in their culture.
I was bowled over by the enthusiasm of these people. Their unbridled81 cheerfulness was amazing.
Inside the hut, the Fijian men were all smiling so brightly, so happy to have a visitor, and they
welcomed me with "Bula, bula, bula!", which roughly translated means, "Welcome, be happy, we
love you!" The men had been soaking yanggona (a kind of peppery root) in a bowl of water for several
hours, and were proudly stirring and ladling out82 a nonalcoholic drink they called kava (what looked to
me like muddy water). They invited me to drink from a half-coconut shell, and as I partook of the kava
(it tasted about as good as it looked), the men laughed and joked with me and one another. After only
a few moments of being with these people, I began to feel a sense of peace that I had never
experienced before.
Marveling at their sense of fun and playfulness, I asked them, "What do you think is the purpose of
life?" They looked at me as if I'd cracked a cosmic joke and said, seemingly in unison, "To be happy, of
course. What else is there?" I said, "It's true: you all seem so happy here in Fiji." One man replied,
"Yes, I think that here in Fiji we are the happiest people on earth ... Of course, I've never been
anywhere else!" which set off another round of raucous laughter.
Then they decided to break their own rules and bring Becky into the hut. They brought over the only
kerosene lamp in the village, along with ukuleles and mandolins, and pretty soon the bure was filled
with the entire village as the men, women, and children sang to us in beautiful four-part Fijian
harmony. It was one of the most powerful and deeply moving experiences of our lives. The most
incredible thing about these people is that they wanted nothing from us except to share the bountiful
happiness they felt for life.

81
82

unbridled übertragen ungezügelt, zügellos; unbridled tongue lose Zunge
ladle 1. (Schöpf-, Suppen)Kelle, Schöpflöffel; 2. ladle out Suppe austeilen
Many hours later and after long farewell wishes, we left the village renewed, with a deep sense of
peace and balance in our lives. We returned after dark that evening to a magical resort with a
heightened awareness and gratitude for the beauty around us. Here we were, in this regal setting,
inside our private little thatched-roof cottage perched atop a lava pinnacle, surrounded by lush
greenery and moonlit coconut palms with the sounds of the gently lapping waves outside our door.
We'd had an incredible day, and felt our lives deeply enriched by the people of this small village. We
realized that we had not achieved our goal for the day, but by pursuing it, we'd come across an even
greater gift, a gift of value beyond compare.
We've returned to Fiji three or four times a year for over six years now. We expected to achieve our
goal of purchasing the ultimate investment on our first trip, but it took roughly twenty trips to Fiji to
finally make a purchase—not just as an investment, but as an opportunity to share the joy of Fiji with
our friends. Instead of buying raw land, two years ago we purchased Namale, the exquisite plantation
resort at which we stayed on our first trip! We wanted to take this place of magic—121 acres and three
miles of beach frontage—and enhance it even more so we could share it with our friends and other
special people. Owning Namale gives me the same joy that I get from conducting seminars where I
watch people transform their capacity to enjoy life. When people arrive at Namale, the same
transformation occurs, only I don't have to do anything! I get to just sit back and watch while people
from all walks of life, from honeymooners to retired couples to high-powered CEOs burdened by the
frenzied83 pace of big business, let loose and rediscover what it's like to be a child again. They happily
dodge84 the fifteen feet of spray shooting from the remarkable blowhole on the reef, play volleyball
with the locals, ride horseback down the beach, or participate in a native kava ceremony.
I love to see the wonder in their eyes as they discover another world under the sea, or drink in a
sunset that rivals those of their greatest fantasies, or their smiles that reflect the spiritual connection
they feel with the Fijian people after a Sunday morning church service in the village. I never realized
when I pursued the goal of an "investment" that I would instead find an environment that would cause
us all to remember what's most important in life. It's not just getting a goal that matters, but the
quality of life you experience along the way.

LIVE THE DREAM
Many people go through life putting off their joy and happiness. To them, goal setting means that
"someday," after they achieve something, only then will they be able to enjoy life to the fullest. The
truth is that if we decide to be happy now, we'll automatically achieve more. While goals provide a
magnificent direction and a way to focus, we must constantly strive to live each day to its fullest,
squeezing all the joy we can out of each moment. Instead of measuring your success and failure in life
by your ability to achieve an individualized and specific goal, remember that the direction we're

83
84

frenzied außer sich, rasend (with vor Dativ); hektisch
dodge (rasch) zur Seite springen, ausweichen; umgangssprachlich: sich drücken (vor Dativ)
heading is more important than individual results. If we continue to head in the right direction, we may
not only achieve the goals we're pursuing but a lot more!
One man whose life I believe represents the power of a compelling future to change one's abilities, and
whose life also reminds us that not achieving our intended goal may actually cause us to achieve a
greater one, is the late Michael Landon. Why was this man beloved by so many?
He represented many of the highest values within our culture: a strong sense of family, doing the right
thing, consistency and integrity, and persistence in the face of adversity, along with a sense of deep
caring and love.
This man who brightened so many lives became a cultural hero through a rather indirect route. He
grew up in a physically and emotionally abusive environment where his parents fought constantly, his
father being Jewish (and hating Catholics) and his mother being a Catholic (who was also anti-Semitic).
His mother frequently staged melodramatic suicide attempts and often pursued Michael to the local
teen hangout, where she'd jump out of a taxi to beat him with a coat hanger.
A chronic bed wetter by the time he reached high school, Michael was afflicted with uncontrollable
facial tics and was making involuntary gulping85 sounds. He was skinny and filled with fear. This
doesn't sound very much like the confident, self-assured patriarch of the Ingalls family he portrayed on
TV's Little House on the Prairie, does it? What changed his life?
One day, in his sophomore86 year in high school, the gym teacher took the class out onto the football
field to take a shot at throwing an old, rusty javelin. Michael was about to have an experience that
would reshape his view of himself forever. When his turn came, he approached the javelin with the
same fear and lack of confidence with which he had approached everything else in his life up until then.
But that day a miracle happened. Michael hurled that javelin87 forward, and it flew out of the track
area thirty feet farther than anyone else had ever thrown it. In that moment, Michael knew he had a
future. As he was to say later in an interview with Life magazine, "On that day, I had found something
I could do better than other people, something I could grab on to. And I grabbed. I begged the coach
to let me take that javelin home for the summer, and he let me. And I threw it and threw it and threw
it."
Michael had found his compelling future, and he pursued it with a ferocious88 intensity. The results
were absolutely amazing. By the time he returned from summer vacation, his body had begun to
transform. In his sophomore year he began doing exercises to build his upper body. And by his senior
year, he had broken the U.S. record for high school students in the javelin throw, winning an athletic
scholarship89 to the University of Southern California. To put it in his words, the "mouse" had "become
a lion." How's that for a metaphor?
The story doesn't end here. Part of Michael's strength emanated from90 a belief he developed by
watching a movie about Samson and Delilah. He believed that if he grew his hair long, he'd become
strong. Indeed, it worked while he was in high school. Unfortunately, his belief was in for a rude
85
86
87
88
89
90

gulp 1. (großer) Schluck; 2. oft gulp down Getränk hinunterstürzen, Speise hinunterschlingen
sophomore Am. Student(in) im zweiten Jahr
javelin Sport: Speer; javelin (throw), throwing the javelin Speerwerfen; javelin thrower Speerwerfer(in)
ferocious wild; grausam
scholarship Gelehrsamkeit; HOCHSCHULWESEN Stipendium
emanate ausströmen; ausgehen (from von)
awakening when he arrived at USC in the crew-cut era of the fifties. A group of short-haired athletes
slammed him to the ground and cut off his long, leonine locks. Even though intellectually he knew
better, his strength immediately disappeared. In fact, his javelin throw dropped by more than 30 feet.
As he pushed himself to match his past performances, he injured himself so badly that he was out for
the year, and the athletic department made it so difficult for him he was compelled to leave. In order
to support himself, he had to unload freight in a manufacturing plant. It looked as though his dream
had died. How would he ever meet his vision of being an international track star?
Fortunately, one day he was spotted by a Hollywood talent agent who asked him to try out for the part
of Little Joe Cartwright in what would be the first color western on television. Bonanza. After that,
there was no looking back. Michael's career as an actor, and eventually a director and producer, was
launched. Missing his dream had given him his future. But the pursuit of his original goals, and the
direction they took him, sculpted both his physical body and his character, two of the elements of
growth that were necessary to prepare him for his ultimate future. Sometimes we need to trust that
our disappointments may truly be opportunities in disguise91.

THE KEY TO ACHIEVING GOALS
Does this mean that if you pursue your goals and meet with initial failure and frustration, you should
move on and do something else? Of course not. No one ever achieved a goal by being interested in its
achievement. One must be committed. In fact, in studying the source of people's success, I've found
that persistence overshadows even talent as the most valued and effective resource in creating and
shaping the quality of life. Most people give up a maddening five feet from their goal!
I believe that life is constantly testing us for our level of commitment, and life's greatest rewards are
reserved for those who demonstrate a never-ending commitment to act until they achieve. This level
of resolve can move mountains, but it must be constant and consistent. As simplistic as this may
sound, it is still the common denominator separating those who live their dreams from those who live
in regret.
I'm a student of those who have learned to take the invisible and make it visible. That's why I respect
poets, writers, actors, and entrepreneurs—people who take an idea and bring it to life. One of the
people I believe is an outstanding role model of creativity and ever expanding personal growth and
success is Peter Guber, the chairman of the board and CEO of Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc.
(formerly known as Columbia Pictures). At the age of 48 Peter has become one of the most powerful
and respected men in the motion picture industry. He and his partner, Jon Peters, have racked up a
combined total of over 52 Academy Award nominations. His work includes films from Midnight Express
to Missing, from Rain Man to Batman. In 1989 their joint company, Guber-Peters Entertainment
Company, was purchased by Sony for over $200 million in order to get the duo to take charge of the

91
disguise 1. verkleiden (as als); Stimme und so weiter verstellen; etwas verbergen, -schleiern; 2. Verkleidung;
Verstellung; Verschleierung; in disguise maskiert, verkleidet; übertragen verkappt; in the disguise of verkleidet als
Columbia Pictures empire. How does someone at such a young age achieve such impact in an
incredibly competitive industry? The answer is through vision and absolute, never-ending persistence.
One day I had the privilege of receiving a phone call from him and finding out that he was a great fan
of my Personal Power™ audiotape program. Each morning as he worked out, he listened to my tapes
so that as he got his body in shape he could simultaneously get his mind in shape! He wanted to thank
me because he'd never made a purchase like this before from television, and certainly never listened
to tapes such as these. As a result of this conversation, I got a chance to meet Peter and develop a
friendship with him.
I have found that one key ingredient of his incredible success is his ability never to let go once he locks
on to a goal. Back in 1979, he and Ion Peters had bought the rights to produce Batman, but it wasn't
until 1988 that they could begin production. Along the way, virtually every- body tried to kill the film.
Studio executives said there was no market for it, and that the only people who would see it were kids
and comic book nuts (who became inflamed when Michael Keaton was selected to play the powerhouse
role of Batman). In spite of continuous disappointment, frustration, and considerable risk, the team of
Guber and Peters made Batman one of the biggest blockbusters of all time, netting the highest
opening-weekend revenues of any film ever released. Proceeds from the film and all ancillary products
are estimated to have produced over $1 billion!
Another example of Guber's persistence was making the film Rain Man. This film should never even
have survived. At various stages of its completion, the script was handled by five writers, and three
directors walked off the project, including Steven Spielberg. Some of them wanted Peter Guber to
change the script by adding some action, some murders, or at least some sex. They argued that no
one would ever watch a film that featured nothing but two guys sitting in a car and traveling across
the country, especially when one was "retarded92."
But Peter understands the power of emotion; he consistently chooses to produce movies that move the
human spirit. He knows what touches people's souls, and he refused to budge, telling everyone that
this was a film about a relationship, that this story of two brothers getting to know each other was all
the action the film needed, and that Rain Man would in fact win an Oscar. The best minds tried to
convince him otherwise, including Spielberg, but he would not relent. Sure enough, the 1988 film went
on to gamer four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor, Best Director, and Best
Screenplay. Persistence pays. Guber believes that with every new film you're starting over, that in
Hollywood you're only as good as your last film. Doesn't this create a lot of fear? You bet! But he says
he uses his fear and the stress of the environment not to paralyze, but rather to propel himself forward.
Too often people never even begin to pursue a goal out of their fear that they'll fail. Or worse, they
start pursuing a goal, then give up too soon. They may have been on track to achieve what they want,
but they fail to maintain the patience of the stonecutter. Because they're not getting immediate
feedback, they give up far too soon. If there's any one skill that I've seen in champions—people who
have really achieved their highest desires—it's an unbelievable level of persistence. They'll change
their approach as necessary, but they won't abandon their ultimate vision.

92

retard verzögern, aufhalten, hemmen
UNLEASH THE POWER OF THE RETICULAR ACTIVATING SYSTEM TO ACHIEVE YOUR GOALS
What is the power that a Peter Guber or a Michael Landon taps into? What is this seemingly
extrasensory perception they have to notice anything and everything that relates to their goal or can
be used to achieve their heart's desire? I believe that in each case, these individuals have learned to
use a mechanism in their brains known as the Reticular Activating System.
It sounds complex, and undoubtedly the actual process is, but the function of your RAS is simple and
profound: it determines what you will notice and what you will pay attention to. It is the screening
device of your mind. Remember that your conscious mind can focus only on a limited number of
elements at any one time, so your brain expends a lot of effort deciding what not to pay attention to.
There are countless stimuli bombarding you right now, but your brain deletes most of it and focuses
on what you believe is important. Its mechanism for achieving this is the RAS. Thus your RAS is
directly responsible for how much of reality you consciously experience.
Let me offer you an example. Have you ever bought a new outfit or car, and then suddenly noticed it
everywhere you looked? Why was that? Didn't they exist before? Yes, of course they did, but you're
noticing them now because your purchase of this item was a clear demonstration to your RAS that
anything related to this object is now significant and needs to be noted. You have an immediate and
heightened awareness of something that actually has always been around you.
This shift in mental posture aligns you more precisely with your goals. Once you decide that
something is a priority, you give it tremendous emotional intensity, and by continually
focusing on it, any resource that supports its attainment will eventually become clear.
Therefore, it's not crucial93 to understand exactly how you'll achieve your goals when you first set
them. Trust that your RAS will point out what you need to know along the way.
"Climb high; Climb far. Your goal the sky; Your aim the star."
INSCRIPTION AT WILLIAMS COLLEGE
Eight years ago, in 1983, I did an exercise that created a future so compelling that my whole life
changed as a result. As pan of the overall process of raising my standards, I established a whole new
set of goals, writing down all the things I would no longer settle for, as well as what I was committed
to having in my life. I set aside all my limiting beliefs and sat down on the beach with my journal. I
wrote continuously for three hours, brainstorming every possibility of what I could ever imagine doing,
being, having, creating, experiencing, or contributing. The time line I gave myself for achieving these
goals was any time from tomorrow to the next twenty years. I never stopped to think whether I could
actually achieve these goals or not. I simply captured any possibility that inspired me, and wrote it
down.
From that beginning, I refined the process six months later when I was invited along with a group of
parapsychologists to the USSR to study psychic phenomena directly from university experts
93

crucial entscheidend, kritisch
throughout Russia. As my group traveled the country, I spent many hours on the train from Moscow to
Siberia and back to Leningrad. With nothing to write on but the back of an old Russian map, I wrote
down all my long-term goals for my spiritual, mental, emotional, physical, and financial destinies, and
then created a series of milestones for each one, working backward. For example, in order to achieve
my top spiritual goal ten years from now, what kind of person would I have to be, and what things
would I need to accomplish by nine years from now, eight years, seven years, and so on, reaching all
the way back until today? What specific action could I take today that would lead me on that
road to the destiny of my choice?
On that day, I set specific goals that transformed my life. I described the woman of my dreams,
detailing what she would be like mentally, emotionally, physically, spiritually. I described what my kids
would be like, the huge income that I would enjoy, and the home that I would live in, including the
third-story circular office area that would overlook the ocean.
A year and a half later. Life magazine was in my home, interviewing me as to how I had made such
incredible shifts in my life. When I pulled out my map to show them all the goals I had written down, it
was amazing to see how many I'd achieved. I had met the woman I described, and married her. I had
found and purchased the home I'd envisioned, down to the finest detail, including the third-story
office in the turret of the castle, overlooking the ocean. When I wrote them down initially, I had no
assurances whatsoever that these goals could be achieved. But I had been willing to suspend
judgment for a short period of time in order to make it work.

TAKE YOUR FIRST STEP NOW!
What we are going to do now is take the first step in turning the invisible into the visible, in making
your dreams a reality. By the time we are finished, you will have created for yourself an anticipation so
great, a future so compelling, that you can't help but take the first steps today. We'll be covering four
areas:
1) Personal development goals,
2) Career/business/economic goals,
3) Toys/adventure goals, and
4) Contribution goals.
For each of these you'll have a set period of time in which to brain-storm. Write rapidly—keep your pen
moving, don't censor yourself, just get it all down on paper. Constantly ask yourself, what would I
want for my life if I knew I could have it any way I wanted it? What would I go for if I knew I
could not fail? Suspend the need to know precisely how. Just discover what it is you truly want. Do this
without questioning or doubting your capability.
Remember, if you get inspired enough, the power you'll unleash94 from within will find a way to
manifest your desire. Also, initially, don't waste time getting overly specific with things like, "I want a
split-level house on Nob Hill, in San Francisco, with all-white, contemporary furniture and a splash of
94

leash (Hunde)Leine
color here and there—oh, and don't forget the Victorian rose garden." Just write, "Dream house. Big
garden. San Francisco." You'll fill in the details later.
So right now, put yourself in a state of mind of absolute faith and total expectation that you can create
anything you want. I'd like you to imagine that you are a kid again on Christmas Eve. You're in a
department store, about to sit on Santa's lap. Do you remember what this was like? If you talk to kids
before Christmas, they have no trouble at all coming up with a fun, outrageous list; they'll say, "I'll tell
you what I want. I want a swimming pool. In fact, I want two swimming pools: one for you, and one
for me!" An adult would probably turn to them and say, "What? You'll be lucky to get a tub in the
backyard!" We'll get practical later, but for now, the point is to be a kid: give yourself the freedom to
explore the possibility of life without limits.

I. Personal Development Goals
Step 1: On the chart provided (or on additional sheets of paper when you need more room) write
down everything that you'd like to improve in your life that relates to your own personal
growth. How would you like to improve your physical body? What are your goals for your mental and
social development? Would you like to learn, for example, to speak another language? Become a speed
reader? Would there be value in reading all of Shakespeare's works? Emotionally, what would you like
to experience, achieve, or master in your life? Maybe you want to be able to instantly break patterns of
frustration or rejection. Maybe you want to feel compassion for those people you used to feel anger
toward. What are some of your spiritual goals? Do you want to feel a greater sense of connection with
your Creator? Or have an expanded feeling of compassion for your neighbor?
The key in writing these goals is to write down everything and anything you can imagine without
letting your mind stop. They can be short-term goals—something you want to accomplish this week,
this year—or they can be long-term goals, something you want to accomplish any time between now
and the next twenty years. Brainstorm for a minimum of five minutes. Don't stop writing at any
time. Be silly, be crazy, be a kid—sometimes a weird idea leads to a great destiny! Here are a few
questions you may want to review just before beginning, but after you review them, go to work and
begin your goal setting right now!
What would you like to leam?
What are some skills you want to master in your lifetime?
What are some character traits you'd like to develop?
Who do you want your friends to be?
Who do you want to be?
What could you do for your physical well-being?
Get a massage every week? Every day?
Create the body of your dreams?
Join a gym—and actually use it?
Hire a vegetarian chef?
Complete the Iron Man Triathlon in Honolulu?
Would you like to conquer your fear of flying?
Or of public speaking?
Or of swimming?
What would you want to learn?
To speak French?
Study the Dead Sea Scrolls?
Dance and/or sing?
Study with violin virtuoso Itzhak Perlman?
Who else would you like to study with?
Would you like to take in a foreign exchange student?

Step 2: Now that you've got a list of goals for your personal development that you can get excited
about, take a minute now to give a time line to each and every one of these. At this stage, it's
not important to know how you're going to accomplish these goals. Just give yourself a time frame
from which to operate. Remember that goals are dreams with a deadline. The simple act of
deciding when you'll achieve a goal sets in motion conscious and unconscious forces to make your
goals a reality. So if you're committed to accomplishing a goal within one year or less, put a 1 next to
it. If you're committed to accomplishing it within three years, put a 3 next to it, and so on for five, ten,
and twenty years.
Step 3: Now choose your single most important one-year goal in this category—a goal that, if
you were to accomplish it this year, would give you tremendous excitement and make you feel that the
year was well invested. Take two minutes to write a paragraph about why you are absolutely
committed to achieving this goal within the year. Why is this compelling for you? What will you
gain by achieving it? What would you miss out on if you didn't achieve it? Are these reasons strong
enough to get you to actually follow through? If not, either come up with a better goal or better
reasons. The most important distinction that I made about goals years ago was that if I had a big
enough why to do something—a strong enough set of reasons—I could always figure out how to
achieve it. Goals alone can inspire, but knowing the deepest reasons why you want them in the first
place can provide you with the long-lasting drive and motivation necessary to persist and achieve.

II. Career/Business/Economic Goals
The next step is setting your career/business/economic goals.
Step 1: Write down anything you want for your career, business, or financial life. What levels of
financial abundance do you want to achieve? To what position do you want to rise? Take five minutes
now to create a list that's worth a million!
Do you want to earn:
$50,000 a year?
$100,000 a year?
$500,000 a year?
$1 million a year?
$10 million a year?
So much that you can't possibly count it?
What goals do you have for your company?
Would you like to take your company public?
Would you like to become the leader in your industry?
What do you want your net worth to be?
When do you want to retire?
How much investment income would you like to have so you no longer have to work?
By what age do you want to achieve financial independence?
What are your money management goals? Do you need to:
Balance your budget?
Balance your checkbook?
Get a financial coach?
What investments would you make? Would you:
Finance an exciting start-up business?
Buy a vintage coin collection?
Start a diaper delivery service?
Invest in a mutual fund?
Set up a living trust?
C

Contribute to a pension plan?

How much do you want to save toward giving your kids a college education?
How much do you want to be able to spend on travel and adventure?
How much do you want to be able to spend on new "toys'?
What are your career goals?
What would you like to contribute to your company?
What breakthroughs would you like to create?
Would you like to become a supervisor? A manager? A CEO?
What would you like to be known for within your profession?
What kind of impact do you want to have?
Step 2: Now that you've written down all your most compelling career, business, and economic goals,
take a minute to give a time line to each one, as you did with your personal development goals. If
you're committed to accomplishing that goal in the next year or less, write a 1 next to it. If you're
committed to achieving it within the next five years, write a 5, and so on. Remember, what matters is
not whether you know how you will attain that goal, or whether the time line is reasonable, but
whether you are absolutely committed to attaining it.
Step 3: Next, choose your top one-year goal in the category of business and economics, and
take two minutes to write a paragraph about it, explaining why you are absolutely committed to
achieving this goal within the year. Be sure to stack up as many reasons as you can for achieving this
goal. Pick reasons that will really drive you, that make you passionate and excited about the process.
Again, if these reasons aren't compelling enough to get you to actually follow through, then come up
with either better reasons or a better goal.

III. Toys/Adventure Goals
If there were no limits economically, what are some of the things you would like to have? What are
some of the things you would like to do? If the genie were before you and any wish you made would
immediately be fulfilled, what would you want most in the world?
Step 1: Take five minutes to write down everything you could ever want, have, do or experience in
your life. Here are some questions to get you going:
Would you like to build, create, or purchase a:
Cottage?
Castle?
Beach house?
Catamaran sailboat?
Private yacht?
Island?
Lamborghini sports car?
Chanel wardrobe?
Helicopter?
Jet plane?
Music studio?
Art collection?
Private zoo stocked with giraffes, alligators,
and hippos?
Virtual Reality machine?
Would you like to attend:
An opening of a Broadway play?
A film premiere in Cannes?
A Bruce Springsteen concert?
A Kabuki theater production in Osaka, Japan?
Would you like to:
Race any of the Andrettis at the next Indy 500?
Play Monica Seles and Steffi Graf, or Boris Becker and Ivan Lendl, in a doubles match?
Pitch the World Series?
Carry the Olympic torch?
Go one-on-one with Michael Jordan?
Swim with the pink dolphins in the oceans of Peru?
Race camels between the pyramids of Egypt with your best friend? And win?
Trek with the Sherpas in the Himalayas?
Would you like to:
Star in a Broadway play?
Share an on-screen kiss with Kim Basinger?
Dirty dance with Patrick Swayze?
Choreograph a modem ballet with Mikhail Baryshnikov?
What exotic places would you visit? Would you:
Sail around the world like Thor Heyerdahl in the Kon-Tifei?
Visit Tanzania and study chimpanzees with Jane Goodall?
Sail on the Calypso with Jacques Cousteau?
Lounge on the sands of the French Riviera?
Sail a yacht around the Greek Isles?
Participate in the Dragon Festivals in China?
Take part in a shadow dance in Bangkok?
Scuba dive in Fiji?
Meditate in a Buddhist monastery?
Take a stroll through the Prado in Madrid?
Book a ride on the next space shuttle flight?
Steps 2 and 3: Again, give a time line to each one, choose your top one-year goal in this
category, and take two minutes to write a paragraph explaining why you are absolutely
committed to achieving
it within the next year. Back it up with strong reasons, and, of course, if these reasons aren't
compelling enough to get you to actually follow through, then come up with either better reasons or a
better goal.

IV. Contribution Goals
These can be the most inspiring, compelling goals of all, because this is your opportunity to leave your
mark, creating a legacy that makes a true difference in people's lives. It could be something as simple
as tithing to your church or committing your household to a recycling program, or as broad as setting
up a foundation to offer opportunities to disadvantaged people.
Step 1: Take five minutes to brainstorm out all the possibilities.
How could you contribute? Would you:
Help build a shelter for the homeless?
Adopt a child?
Volunteer at a soup kitchen?
Read to the blind?
Visit a man or woman serving a prison sentence?
Volunteer with the Peace Corps for six months?
Take balloons to an old folks' home?
How could you help to:
Protect the ozone layer?
Clean up the oceans?
Eliminate racial discrimination?
Halt the destruction of the rain forests?
What could you create? Would you:
Come up with a perpetual motion machine?
Develop a car that runs on garbage?
Design a system for distributing food to all who hunger?
Steps 2 and 3: As before, give each goal a time line, select your top one-year goal in this category,
and take two minutes to write a paragraph explaining why you are absolutely committed to achieving
it within the next year.
"There is nothing like dream to create the future. Utopia today, flesh95 and blood
tomorrow."
VICTOR HUGO
Now you should have four master one-year goals that absolutely excite and inspire you, with sound,
compelling reasons behind them. How would you feel if in one year you had mastered and attained
95

flesh lebendiges Fleisch
them all? How would you feel about yourself? How would you feel about your life? I can't stress
enough the importance of developing strong enough reasons to achieve these goals. Having a powerful
enough why will provide you with the necessary how. Make sure that you look at these four goals daily.
Put them where you'll see them every day, either in your journal, on your desk at the office, or over
your bathroom mirror while you're shaving or putting on makeup. If you back your goals up with a
solid commitment to CANI!, to constant and never-ending improvement of each of these areas, then
you're sure to make progress daily. Make the decision now to begin to follow through on these goals,
beginning immediately.

HOW TO MAKE YOUR GOALS REAL
Now that you have a set of compelling goals and clear-cut reasons for their achievement, the process
for making the goals real has already begun. Your RAS will become sensitized as you consistently
review your goals and reasons, and will attract to you any resource of value toward the achievement of
your clearly defined desire. To ensure the absolute attainment of your goals, you must condition your
nervous system in advance to feel the pleasure they will surely bring. In other words, at least twice a
day, you must rehearse and emotionally enjoy the experience of achieving each one of your most
valued goals. Each time you do this, you need to create more emotional joy as you see, feel, and hear
yourself living your dream.
This continuous focus will create a neural pathway between where you are and where you want to go.
Because of this intense conditioning you'll find yourself feeling a sense of absolute certainty that you'll
achieve your desires, and this certainty will translate into a quality of action that ensures your success.
Your confidence will allow you to attract the appropriate coaches and role models who will guide you in
taking the most effective actions to produce results quickly rather than the traditional trial-and-error
method that can take decades or more. Don't wait another day to begin this process. Start today!

THE PURPOSE OF THE GOAL
Often as we pursue our goals we fail to realize their true impact on the environment around us. We
think that achieving our goal is the end. But if we had a greater understanding we'd realize that often
in the pursuit of our goals, we set in motion processional effects that have consequences even more
far reaching than we ever intended. After all, does the honeybee deliberate on how to propagate
flowers? Of course not, but in the process of seeking the sweet nectar from the flowers, a bee will
invariably pick up pollen on its legs, fly to the next flower, and set in motion a chain of pollination that
will result in a hillside awash in color. The businessman pursues profit, and in so doing can create jobs
that offer people a chance for incredible personal growth and an increase in the quality of life. The
process of earning a livelihood enables people to meet such goals as putting their kids through college.
Children in turn contribute by becoming doctors, lawyers, artists, businessmen, scientists, and parents.
The chain is never ending.
Goals are a means to an end, not the ultimate purpose of our lives. They are simply a tool to
concentrate our focus and move us in a direction. The only reason we really pursue goals is to cause
ourselves to expand and grow. Achieving goals by themselves will never make us happy in the
long term; it's who you become, as you overcome the obstacles necessary to achieve your
goals, that can give you the deepest and most long-lasting sense of fulfillment. So maybe the
key question you and I need to ask is, "What kind of person will I have to become in order to
achieve all that I want?" This may be the most important question that you can ask yourself, for its
answer will determine the direction you need to head personally.
Please take a moment now, and write a paragraph describing all the character traits, skills,
abilities, attitudes, and beliefs that you would need to develop in order to achieve all of the
goals you've written down previously. Certainly you'll have to take action to achieve those goals.
But what qualities will you need to have as a person in order to turn this invisible set of commitments
into your visible reality? Before going on, take a moment right now and write this paragraph.

THE KIND OF PERSON I NEED TO BECOME IN ORDER TO ACHIEVE ALL THAT I WANT:

THE MOST IMPORTANT STEP
For years I had set goals and not followed through. I'd get inspired in the moment, get all pumped up,
but three weeks later I noticed I wasn't following through on anything I'd written down. Writing a goal
is certainly the first step, and most people don't even do that; just the action of committing your ideas
to paper begins to make them more real. But the most important thing you can do to achieve your
goals is to make sure that as soon as you set them, you immediately begin to create momentum. The
most important rules that I ever adopted to help me in achieving my goals were those I learned from a
very successful man who taught me to first write down the goal, and then to never leave the site of
setting a goal without first taking some form of positive action toward its attainment.
As I emphasized in Chapter 2, a true decision is one that you act upon, and one that you act upon
now. Use the momentum you've built up in coming up with your top four one-year goals. The most
powerful
way to continue this momentum is to take immediate action as soon as you finish this chapter. Even
the smallest step—a phone call, a commitment, sketching out an initial plan—will move you forward.
Then develop a list of simple things you can do every day for the next ten days. I can promise you that
ten days of small actions in the direction of your goals will begin to create a chain of habits that will
ensure your long-term success.
If your number-one personal development goal for the next year is to learn jazz dancing, for instance,
"let your fingers do the walking" through those yellow pages today. Call the dance studio for a
schedule, and enroll in a class.
If your top toy/adventure goal for the next year is a Mercedes-Benz, call your local dealership for a
brochure, or visit them this afternoon and take a test drive. I'm not saying that you need to buy it
today, but at least find out what it costs or drive it so that it becomes more real. Your intensified
desire will help you to start putting together a plan.
If your top economic goal for the next year is to earn $100,000, then start evaluating now what steps
you must take. Who's already earning this kind of income who can teach you the keys to their
effectiveness? Do you need to get a second job in order to earn this kind of income? What skills do you
need to hone in order to achieve it? Do you need to start saving more than you spend, and invest the
difference so that your income can flow from more than just your work? Do you need to start a new
venture? What resources do you really need to gather?
Remember, you need to experience the feeling of achieving your top one-year goals in each of the four
categories at least once a day. Ideally, you'll look at them once in the morning and once at night.
Review your entire list every six months to ensure that your goals stay vital. You may want to go
through the brainstorming process again in order to create some new goals, and I'm sure you'll want
to add and delete goals as your life takes on exciting new shape.
An additional distinction that's critical for long-term success is that achieving our goals can be a curse
unless we have already set up a new set of higher goals before we reach the first. As soon as you find
yourself about to achieve a goal, you need to make sure that you design the next set of goals
immediately. Otherwise you'll experience something we all need to avoid: outrunning our dream. How
many times have we read about people who achieve their ultimate life goals only to say, "Is that all
there is?" because they feel they have no place to go from the top?
A classic example of this is several Apollo astronauts who prepared their entire lives for the ultimate
mission: to land on the moon. When they finally did it they were euphoric, but after returning to earth,
some of them developed a level of emotional depression beyond what most people could imagine.
After all, there was now nothing to look forward to. What could be a bigger goal than making it to the
moon, doing the impossible, and exploring outer space? Maybe the answer is in exploring the equally
uncharted frontier of inner space of our minds, our hearts, and our souls.
I've heard about young women who plan their weddings for months, sometimes years, pouring all of
their creativity, resources, and even identity, into a perfect fairytale fantasy. They pin all their hopes
and dreams on what they expect will be a once-in-a-lifetime event. After the glow wears off, the young
bride, like the astronaut, feels let down. How do you follow up the peak moment of your life? She
needs to look forward to the more important, never-ending adventure of building a relationship.
How do people achieve their heart's desire and still feel the excitement and passion that come from
aiming toward a goal? As they approach what they've pursued for so long, they immediately establish
a new set of compelling goals. This guarantees a smooth transition from completion to new inspiration
and a continued commitment to growth.
Without that commitment, we'll do what's necessary to feel satisfied, but never venture outside our
comfort zones. That's when we lose our drive: we lose our desire to expand, and we begin to stagnate.
Often people die emotional and spiritual deaths long before they ever leave their physical
bodies. The way to break out of this trap is to realize that contribution may be the ultimate goal.
Finding a way to help others—those we care about deeply—can inspire us for a lifetime. There is
always a place in the world for those who are willing to give of their time, energy, capital, creativity,
and commitment.
Consider Robin Williams, for example. Here is a man who has a great advantage over his late friend
John Belushi because he has discovered a way to make sure he never runs out of goals. Robin and his
friends, Whoopi Goldberg and Billy Crystal, have found a mission that will continually tap their greatest
resources: helping the homeless. Arnold Schwarzenegger has found a similar emotional reward in his
relationship with the Special Olympics and the President's Council on Physical Fitness. All these
successful people have learned that there's nothing quite so compelling as a feeling of sincere
contribution.
Make sure your next level of dreams will continually pull you forward in a constant, never-ending
search for improvement. A commitment to CANI! is truly the universal insurance policy for life-long
happiness. Remember that a compelling future is the food on which our souls thrive—we all need a
continued sense of emotional and spiritual growth.

PROGRAM YOURSELF FOR SUCCESS
Now that you have goals that truly inspire you, that will drive you forward, you've got to make them
so compelling that they feel real in your nervous system. How do you develop that ironclad sense of
certainty? First, clear away any roadblocks by figuring out up front what could possibly prevent you,
and deal with them now rather than fifty miles down the road. Then, make commitments to people you
know will hold you to your higher standard. Reinforce your new neural pathways by continuous
rehearsal, with repetition and emotional intensity. Imagine your goals vividly again and again.
Incorporate the visual, auditory, and kinesthetic elements that will make your goal a reality!

THE ULTIMATE LESSON
The most important lesson in this chapter is that a compelling future creates a dynamic sense of
growth. Without this, we're only half alive. A compelling future is not an accessory, but a necessity. It
allows us not only to achieve, but to partake of the deep sense of joy, contribution, and growth that
gives meaning to life itself.
"Where there is no vision, the people perish ... ."
PROVERBS, 29:18
I remember reading about the astounding number of people in this country who die within three years
of retiring, which proves to me that if you lose the sense that you are producing or contributing in
some way, you literally lose the will to live, and that if you do have a reason to hang on, you will. In
fact, studies have found that elderly or ill people who are close to death often hang on until just after
the holidays. As long as they had something like Christmas and the family visit to look forward to, they
had a reason to live, but after it passed, they had no compelling future. This phenomenon isn't true
only of our own country; it's been noted in cultures around the world. For example, in China the death
rate drops off right before and during major festivals, and picks up again as soon as the festivals are
over.
It doesn't matter if you're eighteen or eighty—you'll still need something to drive you forward. The
inspiration you seek is found within, waiting to be called upon by an unforeseen challenge or inspired
request.
Colonel Harlan Sanders found it at age sixty-five, when his meager Social Security check arrived. His
anger drove him to action. We don't have to wait for an event in order to have the inspiration. We can
design it.
Venerable funnyman George Bums understands the importance and power of a compelling future.
When asked to sum up his philosophy of life, he once replied, "You have to have something to get you
out of bed. I can't do anything in bed, anyway. The most important thing is to have a point, a direction
you're headed."* Now in his nineties, he's still sharpening his wit, still taking on movie and TV projects,
and I recently heard that he booked himself at the London Palladium in the year 2000, when he'll be
104 years old—how's that for creating a compelling future?!
Use your power. You now know what to do to inspire yourself. It's time to do it. If you've read this
chapter passively up until now, go back and do the exercises. They're fun, and they're easy. First, get
your list of your top four one-year goals. Second, get clear on the "why." Third, develop the ritual of
reviewing your goals and rehearsing the joy of their achievement daily for ten days. Fourth, surround
yourself with role models and those who can help you develop a plan that will guide you in making it
all real. Each of these steps will help you to program your RAS and sensitize you to all the possible
resources you can incorporate to bring your goals to fruition. This consistent review will also provide
for you the sense of certainty that you need to get yourself to take action. So let's turn to the next
chapter, and let me share with you a way to break up any obstacles that would stop you by taking
on ...
13
THE TEN-DAY MENTAL CHALLENGE

"Habit is either the best of servants or the worst of masters."
NATHANIEL EMMONS

Consistency . .. Isn't this what we're all after? We don't want to create results once in a while. We
don't want to feel joyous just/or the moment. We don't want to be at our best sporadically. The mark
of a champion is consistency—and true consistency is established by our habits. I'm sure you realize
by now that I didn't write this book just to help you make a few distinctions. Nor is it designed to
inspire you with a few stories or share with you a bit of interesting information that you might use
every now and then to create a little "personal development." This book—and my entire life—is
dedicated to producing a measurable increase in the quality of our lives.
This can be accomplished only through a new pattern of taking massive action. The true value to an
individual of any new strategy or skill is in direct proportion to the frequency of its use. As I've said so
many times, knowing what to do is not enough: you must do what you know. This chapter is designed
to assist you in establishing habits of excellence—the patterns of focus that will help you maximize the
impact you have on yourself and others.
In order to take our lives to the next level, however, we must realize that the same pattern of thinking
that has gotten us to where we are will not get us to where we want to go. One of the biggest
challenges I see in both individuals and corporations is that they resist change (their greatest ally),
justifying their actions by pointing out that their current behavior is what got them to the level of
success that they now enjoy. This is absolutely true and, in reality, a new level of thinking is now
required in order to experience a new level of personal and professional success.
To do this, we must once and for all break through the barriers of our fear and take control of the
focus of our minds. Our old patterns of allowing our minds to be enslaved by the problems of the
moment must be broken once and for all. In their place, we must establish the lifelong commitment to
focus on the solutions and to enjoy the process. Throughout this book you've learned a wealth of
powerful tools and strategies to make your life richer, fuller, more joyous and exciting. But if you just
read this book and fail to use it, it's like buying a powerful new computer and never taking it out of the
box, or buying a Ferrari and then letting it sit out in your driveway, collecting dust and grime.
So let me offer you a simple plan for interrupting your old patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving,
a way that can help you condition these new, empowering alternatives and make them absolutely
consistent.
Years ago, I found myself caught up in a pattern of frustration and anger. I seemed to have problems
everywhere I turned. At that point, thinking positively was not high on my list of solutions. After all, I
was being "intelligent," and intelligent people don't make things look positive when they aren't! I had
plenty of people around me who supported this idea (and they were equally frustrated with their lives,
as well!). In reality, at the time I was being incredibly negative and seeing things worse than they
were. I was using my pessimism as a shield. It was my feeble attempt at protecting myself from the
pain of failed expectations: I'd do anything to keep from being disappointed once again. But in
adopting this pattern, this same barrier that kept me out of pain also kept me out of pleasure. It
barred me from solutions and sealed me in a tomb of emotional death where one never experiences
too much pain or too much pleasure, and where one continuously justifies one's limited actions by
stating they're "just being realistic."
In truth, life is a balance. If we allow ourselves to become the kind of people who refuse to see the
weeds that are taking root in our gardens, our delusions will destroy us. Equally destructive, however,
is what happens to those people who, out of fear, constantly imagine the garden overgrown and
choked with intractable weeds. The leader's path is one of balance. He notes the weeds with a smile
upon his face, knowing that the weeds' visit to the garden is all but over—because he's spotted them,
he can and will immediately act to remove them.
We don't have to feel negative about weeds. They're part of life. Weneed to see them, acknowledge
them, focus on the solution, and immediately do whatever it takes to eliminate their influence from our
lives. Pretending they're not there won't make things better; neither will becoming inflamed with
anger by their presence nor devastated by fear. Their continual attempt to be part of your garden is a
fact of life. Simply remove them. And do it in an emotional state of playfulness or joy while you're
getting the job done; otherwise you'll spend the rest of your life being upset, because I can promise
you one thing: there will be more "weeds" that continue to come up. And unless you want to live in
reaction to the world every time problems occur, you need to remember that they're actually an
important part of life. They keep you vigorous, they keep you strong, they keep you vigilant in noticing
what needs to be done to keep the garden of your life healthy and rich.
We need to practice this same approach in weeding the gardens of our minds. We have to be able to
notice when we start to have a negative pattern—not beat ourselves up about it, and not dwell on it—
but simply break the patterns as quickly as we discover them, and replace them with the new seeds of
mental, emotional, physical, financial, spiritual, and professional success. How do we break these
patterns when they show up? Simply remember the steps of NAC you learned in Chapter 6.
1) You need to decide what you do want. If you really want to feel a sense of passion, joy, and control
over your life—which obviously you must, or you wouldn't be reading this now—then you know what
you want.
2) You've got to get leverage on yourself. If you read this whole book and don't establish any new
patterns, wouldn't that be an unbelievable waste of time? In contrast, how will you feel as you truly
use what you've learned to take immediate control of your mind, body, emotions, finances, and
relationships? Let your desire to avoid pain and induce massive pleasure drive you to make the
changes necessary to take your life to the next level now. In order to accomplish this, you must . . .
3) Interrupt the limiting pattern. The best way I know to do this is to simply go on a "Mental Diet"—
that is, take a set period of time and take conscious control of all your thoughts. A Mental Diet is an
opportunity to eliminate the negative and destructive patterns of thinking and feeling that inevitably
come from living life in an emotionally reactionary and mentally undisciplined fashion. I committed
myself to such a mental cleansing almost eight years ago, and found it to be a very profound and
invaluable process.
I came across the idea in a small pamphlet by Emmet Fox96. In it, he expounded upon the value of
spending seven days without ever holding a negative thought. The idea seemed so Pollyanna, so
ridiculously simple, that at first I thought the whole concept was a total waste of time. But as he began
to lay out the rules of this diet he was prescribing to cleanse the mental system, I began to realize it
might be more difficult than I thought. The challenge intrigued me, and the final results astounded me.
I'd like to broaden the challenge Mr. Fox created in 1935 and expand it as a tool that can help you
integrate the master tools of change that you've been learning thus far in this book, beginning today.
Here's your opportunity now to really apply all the new disciplines you've learned in the previous
chapters. My challenge to you is simply this:
For the next ten days, beginning immediately, commit to taking full control of all your
mental and emotional faculties by deciding right now that you will not indulge in or dwell on
any unresourceful thoughts or emotions for ten consecutive days.
It sounds easy, doesn't it? And I'm sure it could be. But those who begin it are frequently surprised to
discover how often their brains are engaged in nonproductive, fearful, worrisome, or destructive
thinking.
Why would we continually indulge in mental and emotional patterns that create unnecessary stress in
our lives? The answer is simple: we actually think it helps! Many people live in a state of worry. In
order to accomplish this state, they continually focus and dwell on the worst possible scenario. Why
would they do this? Because they believe it will get them to do something—to take action. But the
truth of the matter is that worry usually puts a person in an extremely unresourceful emotional state.
It doesn't usually empower us to take action, but rather, it tends to cause us to become overwhelmed
with frustration or fear.
Yet, using some of the simplest tools in this book, you could change your worried state immediately by
focusing on a solution. You could ask yourself a better question like, "What do I need to do right now
to make this better?" Or you could change your state by changing the vocabulary you use to describe
the sensations you're feeling: from "worried" to "a little bit concerned."
In essence, if you decide to accept my Ten-Day Challenge, it means that you've committed to putting
yourself and keeping yourself in a passionately positive state, no matter what happens. It means that
if you find yourself in any unresourceful emotional states, you'll instantaneously change your
physiology or focus into a resourceful state regardless of your desires of the moment. For example, if
someone does something that you believe is destructive or even hateful toward you, and you begin
to find yourself becoming angry, you must immediately change your emotional state, regardless of the
situation, during these ten consecutive days.
Again, remember that you have a multitude of strategies for changing your state. You could ask
yourself a more empowering question like, "What could I learn from this?" or "What's great about this
96

Fox, Emmet, The Seven-Day Mental Diet, Marina del Rey: DeVorss & Co. Publishers, © 1935
situation, and what's not yet perfect?" These questions will lead you into resourceful states where
you'll find solutions instead of dwelling on and habitually running the cycle of increased anger and
frustration. How many other ways could you change your state if you were really committed?
Remember, our goal is not to ignore the problems of life, but to put ourselves in better mental and
emotional states where we can not only come up with solutions, but act upon them. Those people who
focus on what they can't control are continually disempowered. Yes, it's true, we can't control the wind
or the rain or the other vagaries of weather, but we can tack our sails in a way that allows us to shape
the direction of our lives.
When I first considered going on Fox's mental diet, I believed that staying positive would get me hurt.
After all, I had been positive in the past, and my expectations weren't met. I had felt devastated.
Eventually, though, I found that by changing my focus I was able to take more control of my life by
avoiding the problem state and immediately focusing on solutions. My requests for inner answers were
quickly met when I was in a resourceful state.
Every great, successful person I know shares the capacity to remain centered, clear and powerful in
the midst of emotional "storms." How do they accomplish this? Most of them have a fundamental rule:
In life, never spend more than 10 percent of your time on the problem, and spend at least 90 percent
of your time on the solution. Most important, don't sweat the small stuff. . . and remember, it's all
small stuff!
If you decide that you're going to take on my Ten-Day Challenge—and I sense you will, since you've
made it this far in the book—then realize that for the next ten days, you're going to spend 100 percent
of your time on solutions, and no time on problems!
But won't this make the problems worse? "If I don't worry about my problems, won't they get out of
control?" I seriously doubt it. Ten days of focusing entirely upon solutions, on what's great in your life,
on what works and how lucky you are will not make your problems worse. But these new patterns may
make you so strong that what you once thought was a problem may disappear as you assume a new
identity of an unstoppable and joyous human being.
There are four simple yet important rules to this Ten-Day Challenge.
So if you're going to take it on, remember the following:

THE TEN-DAY MENTAL CHALLENGE—RULES OF THE GAME
Rule 1. In the next ten consecutive days, refuse to dwell on any unresourceful thoughts or feelings.
Refuse to indulge in any disempowering questions or devitalizing vocabulary or metaphors.
Rule 2. When you catch yourself beginning to focus on the negative—and you certainly will—you are
to immediately use the techniques you've learned to redirect your focus toward a better emotional
state. Specifically, use the Problem-Solving Questions97 as your first line of attack; for example:
"What's great about this? What's not perfect yet?" Remember, by asking a question like, "What's not

97
The Problem-Solving Questions, Morning Power Questions, and Evening Power Questions are
all listed in Chapter 8
perfect yet?," you're presupposing that things will be perfect. This will change your state. It doesn't
ignore the problem, but it keeps you in the right state while you identify what needs to be changed.
In addition, set yourself up for success each morning for the next ten days by asking yourself the
Morning Power Questions. You can do them before you get out of bed or while you're in the shower,
but make sure you do them right away. This will focus you in the direction of establishing empowering
mental and emotional patterns each day as you awake. In the evening, use the Evening Power
Questions, or any questions you believe will put you in a great state before you drop off to sleep.
Rule 3. For the next ten consecutive days, make certain that your whole focus in life is on solutions
and not on problems. The minute you see a possible challenge, immediately focus on what the solution
could be.
Rule 4. If you backslide—that is, if you catch yourself indulging in or dwelling on an unresourceful
thought or feeling—don't beat yourself up. There's no problem with this as long as you change
immediately. However, if you continue to dwell on unresourceful thoughts or feelings for any
measurable length of time, you must wait until the following morning and start the ten days over. The
goal of this program is ten consecutive days without holding or dwelling on a negative thought. This
starting-over process must happen no matter how many days in a row you've already accomplished
the task.

The Ten-Day Mental Challenge
You may ask, "How long can I focus on the negative before it's considered 'dwelling'?" To me, one
minute of continual focus on, and emotional attachment to, what's wrong is dwelling. One minute is
more than enough time for us to be able to catch ourselves and create a change. Our whole goal is to
catch the monster while it's little. Certainly, within twenty to forty seconds you know if you're being
negative about something.
If I were you, though, I'd give myself up to a maximum of two minutes to notice the challenge and
begin to change your state. Two minutes is certainly enough time to identify that you're in a negative
state. Break the pattern. If you allow yourself to go as long as five minutes or more, you'll find the
Mental Challenge won't accomplish its task; instead, you'll just learn to vent your emotions more
quickly. The goal is to knock things out before you ever get in a negative emotional state in
the first place.
When I first tried this exercise, after doing it for three days I got caught up and angry about
something and indulged for about five minutes in negative emotions before I realized what I was doing.
I had to start all over. On my second trip through, on the sixth day, I ran into some major challenges,
but at this point I was committed. I wasn't about to start over again! So I immediately found myself
focusing on the solution.
The benefit, as you can guess, was not just staying with my mental diet, but I began conditioning
myself for a tremendous, lifelong pattern of staying in a positive emotional state, even when there
were challenges around me, and focusing the majority of my energy on solutions.
To this day, even when I hear about problems, as you've probably noticed, I tend to call them
challenges. I don't dwell on them, and Iimmediately focus on how I can convert the challenge into an
opportunity.
"We first make our habits, and then our habits make us."
JOHN DRYDEN
You may decide that while you're taking this Mental Challenge you may want to cleanse your body as
well. In Unlimited Power I issued a ten-day physical challenge. Combining both the ten-day Living
Health Vitality Challenge with the ten-day Mental Challenge can produce powerful results that can take
your life to another level in the next ten days. By committing and following through on this Mental
Challenge, you'll be giving yourself a break from limiting habits and flexing the muscles of
empowerment. You'll be sending your brain a new message and commanding new results. You will be
demanding empowering emotions, enriching thoughts, inspiring questions.
With a clear-cut moving-away idea (the pain of starting over) you are giving your brain strong signals
to search for empowering patterns. By setting a higher standard for what thoughts you'll allow your
mind to dwell on, you'll begin to notice the garbage and destructive patterns you used to blindly or
lazily accept from yourself. And as a result, you'll find it difficult to ever go back to the old ways again.
The starkness of this approach will cause you to remember these patterns in the future and make it
difficult to go back to the old patterns again.
A word of caution: Don't begin this ten-day commitment unless and until you are certain that you are
going to live by it for the full length of time. If you don't start out with a sense of commitment, you
certainly won't make it through the ten days. This is not a challenge for the weak at heart. This is only
for those who are really committed to conditioning their nervous systems for new, empowering
emotional patterns that can take their lives to the next level.
Have you decided yet whether you're going to do this? Think about it carefully before committing
yourself, because once you do, you need to hold yourself to your word and experience the joy that
comes with a disciplined effort. If your answer is yes, for the next ten days you'll be taking the things
you've learned intellectually up until now and making them part of your daily experience of life. These
ten days will help you use the NAC technology to condition yourself for success. You'll be asking new
questions, using Transformational Vocabulary and more empowering global metaphors, and instantly
changing your focus and physiology.
Let's face it, we all have our indulgences in life. If you're overweight, your indulgences may be
chocolate fudge sundaes or double-cheese pizza. When you diet, you say to yourself, "Enough is
enough. This is where I draw the line." You hold yourself to a higher standard and enjoy the selfesteem that comes with that single, small, disciplined act. But we all have our mental indulgences, too.
Some people feel sorry for themselves.
Some get angry in a way that subverts their own best interests. Some of us fail to focus on the things
that need attention. My challenge to you is to decide that for ten days, you will not allow yourself a
single one of these destructive mental indulgences.
What stands in the way of just deciding to banish them? Three things, really. One is laziness. A lot of
people know what they should do, but never quite get up the energy to do it. Many know their lives
could be something more, yet they're sitting in front of the tube, eating junk food, depriving their
minds and bodies of the fuel they need to spark new growth.
The second obstacle is fear. All too often, the security of a mediocre present is more comfortable than
the adventure of trying to be more in the future. So many people get to the end of their lives
wondering what could have been—don't let this happen to you.
The third challenge is force of habit. We have our old emotional patterns: the deadening force of
routine. Like a plane on automatic pilot, our brain dredges up the same old responses it always has.
We face an obstacle and see the problem instead of the solution. We suffer a reversal and feel sorry
for ourselves instead of deciding how to learn from it. We make a mistake and see it as some sort of
baleful judgment on what we can't do, instead of deciding to learn from it and move forward. This
exercise is a way to get beyond all three and produce lasting changes with benefits that can multiply
over time. This is your opportunity to make a true commitment to CANI!
This Ten-Day Challenge is not easy. If you habitually feel sorry for yourself, it's not easy to stop. If
you're focusing on financial pressure, operating out of fear won't make it any better. If you blame your
spouse for everything that goes wrong in your life, the easy thing is to keep doing it. If you mask your
insecurities by being angry all the time, if you wallow in guilt, if you blame your looks or your financial
situation or your upbringing for all your problems, it's not easy to change. But you already have so
many tools to improve your life. This is my challenge to you to start using them.
Believe me, the power inherent in this little exercise is amazing. If you stick with it, it will do four
things for you. First, it will make you acutely aware of all the habitual mental patterns that hold you
back. Second, it will make your brain search for empowering alternatives to them.
Third, it will give you an incredible jolt of confidence as you see that you can turn your life around.
Fourth, and most importantly, it will create new habits, new standards, and new expectations that will
help you expand more than you could ever believe.
Success is processional. It's the result of a series of small disciplines that lead us into habitual patterns
of success that no longer require consistent will or effort. Like a freight train picking up speed, this
exercise in doing things right consciously, in erasing the patterns that hold you back and installing new
ones that can propel you forward, will give you a sense of momentum like very few things you've done
in your life.
The great news about this is that, unlike a diet where you starve yourself and eventually have to go
back to eating, your old pattern of finding the negative is not one you ever have to return to again.
This may not be a ten-day exercise in the end. It's really an opportunity for you to become "addicted"
to a positive focus for the rest of your life. But if, after banishing your toxic mental patterns for ten
days, you want to return, be my guest. The truth is that once you experience life in this mentally vital
and alive way, going back would disgust you. But if you ever find yourself getting off track, you have
the tools to immediately put yourself back on the high road again.
Remember, though, only you can make this ten-day Mental Challenge work. Only you can make the
commitment to really follow through.
You might consider getting extra leverage on yourself to make certain you follow through. One way of
providing yourself extra incentive is to announce to the people around you what you're committing to,
or find a partner who wants to take on this ten-day Mental Challenge with you.
In addition, it would be ideal for you to keep a written journal while you're meeting the ten-day Mental
Challenge, writing your experiences each day and recording how you successfully dealt with those
various challenges. I think you'll find it invaluable to review later on.
Finally, one of the most valuable took in creating a change is not just interrupting your old pattern, but
replacing it with something new. What you may decide to commit to doing is something I do on an
ongoing basis throughout my life: become a reader.

LEADERS ARE READERS
Years ago, one of my teachers, Jim Rohn, taught me that reading something of substance, something
of value, something that was nurturing, something that taught you new distinctions every day, was
more important than eating. He got me hooked on the idea of reading a minimum of thirty minutes a
day. He said, "Miss a meal, but don't miss your reading."
I've found this to be one of the most valuable distinctions in my life. So while you're cleansing your
system of the old, you might want to be empowering it by continuing to read the new. And there are
plenty of pages of valuable insight and strategy ahead of you that you can be utilizing during these ten
days.
If you've learned anything from this book, it's the power of decisions. You're at a critical point in our
journey together. You've learned a variety of fundamental strategies and distinctions that can now be
used to powerfully and positively shape your life. My question to you right now is: Have you made the
decision to use them? Don't you owe it to yourself to make the most out of what this book has to offer
you? This is one of the most important ways to follow through. Commit now to do this only as quickly
as you're committed to living the quality of life that you once only dreamed of.
So realize that this chapter is my personal challenge to you. It's an opportunity and an invitation to
demand more from yourself than other people would ever expect, and to reap the rewards that come
from this commitment. It's a time to put in practice what you've learned. But it's also a time to decide
whether you're willing to make the commitment to make some simple yet powerful improvements in
your life. I know that's what you desire. If you need evidence that you can do it, I sincerely believe
this chapter will provide it—if you're willing to go for it full out.
At this point, you're ready to move on to the next section of this book. You've learned the fundamental
tools for shaping your life by making decisions. But now let's study the Master System that's
controlling every decision you make throughout your life. Understanding the basis of your own
personal philosophy is accomplished by ...
PART 2
TAKING CONTROL
THE MASTER SYSTEM
14
ULTIMATE INFLUENCE: YOUR MASTER SYSTEM

"Elementary, my dear Watson ..."
WITH APOLOGIES TO SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE

One of the things I love most about what I do is the opportunity to unravel98 the mystery of human
behavior and thereby to offer solutions that truly make a difference in the quality of people's lives. I'm
fascinated to probe below the surface to find out the "why" behind a person's behavior, to discover
their core beliefs, questions, metaphors, references and values. Because my forte is being able to
produce immediate and measurable results, out of necessity I've learned how to quickly locate key
leverage points for facilitating change. Every day, I get to live the role of Sherlock Holmes, sleuthing99
minute details to piece together the jigsaw100 puzzle of each person's unique experience—I guess you
could say that I'm a very private detective! There are telltale clues to human behavior just as blatant
as the smoking gun.
Sometimes the clues101 are a little more subtle, and it takes further investigation to uncover them.
However, as diverse as human behavior is, one of the things that has allowed me to do what I do so
successfully is that ultimately it all comes down to certain patterns made up of specific key elements.
If you and I have a grasp of these organizing principles, then we are empowered not only to influence
people for positive change, but also to understand why they do what they do.
Understanding the Master System that directs all human behavior is as much a science as are
chemistry and physics, governed by predictable laws and patterns of action and reaction. You can think
of your own Master System—the five components that determine how you evaluate everything that
happens in your life—as a kind of Periodic Table, de- tailing the elements of human behavior. Just as
all physical matter breaks down to the same basic units, so does the process of human behavior to
one who knows what to look for. It's the combination and structure—how we use these elements—that
makes each of us unique. Some mixtures are volatile and produce explosive results. Other
combinations neutralize, some catalyze, and some paralyze.
Bombarded as we are with the countless things that happen to us every day, most of us don't even
realize that we have a personal philosophy, much less the power it has to direct our evaluations of
what things mean to us. The second section of this book is dedicated to assisting you
in taking direct control of your Master System of evaluation—the force that controls the way you feel
and what you do every moment of your life.
98

unravel (besonders Brt. -ll-, Am. -l-) (sich) auftrennen (Pullover und so weiter); entwirren
sleuth umgangssprachlich Spürhund männlich, Detektiv männlich
100
jigsaw Laubsäge jigsaw puzzle Puzzle(spiel)
101
clue Anhaltspunkt, Fingerzeig, Spur
99
Understanding the Master System of others allows you to immediately get to the essence of a person,
whether it's your spouse, your child, your boss or business partner, even the people you meet every
day. Wouldn't this be one of the greatest gifts you could ever receive: to be able to know what is
driving all the people who are most important to you—including yourself? Wouldn't it be great to get
beyond any upsets or challenges with someone and understand why they're behaving this way—and
then, without judgment, to be able to immediately reconnect with who they really are?
With children, we usually remember that crankiness indicates a need for a nap, rather than a sour
disposition. In a marriage, it's especially important to be able to see through the day-to-day stresses
so that you can support each other and nurture the bond that brought you together in the first place.
If your spouse is feeling pressure from work, and is venting his or her frustration, it doesn't mean that
your marriage is over, but it's a sign to be more attentive and to put your focus on supporting this
person you love. After all, you wouldn't judge the stock market based solely on one day when the
Dow-Jones Average plunges twenty points. By the same token, you can't judge a person's character by
one isolated incident. People are not their behaviors.
The key to understanding people is to understand their Master Systems so you can appreciate their
individual, systematic way of reasoning. We all have a system or procedure that we go through
in order to determine what things mean to us and what we need to do about them in
virtually any situation in life. You and I need to remember that different things are important to
different people, and they'll evaluate what's happening differently based upon their perspective and
conditioning.
Imagine playing tennis and hitting a poor serve. From your perspective, you blew it. From your
opponent's perspective, it was a great shot—for him. From the line judge's perspective, the serve was
neither good nor bad; it was simply "in" or "out." What often happens after hitting a poor shot? People
start generalizing —and more often than not, in a disempowering way. "What a terrible serve"
becomes "I couldn't serve today to save my life." Their next few serves are likely to be equally
underwhelming. Then the train of generalization picks up speed, moving from "I couldn't serve today
to save my life" to "I never did have that great a serve" to "I'm really not such a hot tennis player" to
"I never seem to be able to master anything" to "I'm a horrible person." It looks ludicrous here,
spelled out in lurid detail, but isn't this the way it happens in so many areas of our lives? If we fail to
take control of our evaluation process, it literally runs wild and sweeps us into the spiraling pattern of
self-recrimination.

SUPERIOR EVALUATIONS CREATE SUPERIOR LIVES
In modeling the most successful people in our culture, one common denominator I notice without fail is
that they make superior evaluations. Think of anyone you consider to be a master of anything, in
business, politics, law, the arts, relationships, physical health, spirituality. What has brought them to
their personal pinnacle? What has made prosecuting attorney Gerry Spence win almost every case he
has taken on in the last fifteen years? Why does Bill Cosby seem to delight his audiences virtually
every time he takes the stage? What makes Andrew Lloyd Webber's music so hauntingly perfect?
It all comes down to these people making superior evaluations in their areas of expertise. Spence has
honed a superior understanding of what influences human emotion and decision. Cosby has spent
years developing key references, beliefs, and rules about how to use anything in his environment as
material to make people laugh. Webber's mastery of melody, orchestration, arrangement, and other
elements enables him to write music that touches us at the deepest level.
Consider Wayne Gretzky of the Los Angeles Kings. He has scored more points than anyone in the
history of the National Hockey League. What makes him so powerful? Is it because he's the biggest,
strongest, or fastest player in the league? By his own admission, the answer to all three of these
questions is no. Yet he was consistently the number-one scorer in the league. When asked what makes
him so effective, his response is that while most players skate to where the puck is, he tends to skate
to where the puck is going. At any moment in time, his ability to anticipate—to evaluate the velocity of
the puck, its direction, the present strategies and physical momentum of the players around him—
allows him to place himself in the optimum position for scoring. One of the top money managers in the
world is Sir John Templeton, dean of international investing, whose track record for the last fifty jears
is unrivaled. A sum of $10,000 invested in the Templeton Growth Fund at its inception in 1954 would
be worth $2.2 million today! In order to have him personally work with you on your portfolio, you must
invest at minimum of $10 million cash; his top client entrusted him with over $11 billion to invest.
What has made Templeton one of the greatest investment advisors of all time? When I asked him this
question, he didn't hesitate a moment. He said, "My ability to evaluate the true value of an
investment." He's been able to do this despite the vagaries of trends and 'short-term market
fluctuations.

WEALTH IS THE RESULT OF EFFECTIVE EVALUATIONS
Other top investment advisors whom I've studied and modeled in the past year include Peter Lynch,
Robert Prechter, and Warren Buffet. To help him in his financial evaluations. Buffet employs a powerful
metaphor he learned from his friend and mentor Ben Graham: "As a metaphor for looking at market
fluctuations, just imagine them as coming from a remarkably accommodating fellow named Mr. Market
who's your partner in private business.. . . Mr. Market's quotations are anything but [stable]. Why?
Well, for the sad-to-say reason that the poor fellow has incurable emotional problems. At times he
feels euphoric and we can see only the favorable factors affecting the business, and when he's in that
mood he names a very high buy-sell price because he fears that you'll snap up his interest and rob him
of imminent gains. At other times he's depressed and he can see nothing but trouble ahead for both
the business and the world. On those occasions he'll name a very low price since he's terrified that you
will unload your interest on him. .. . But like Cinderella at the ball, you must heed one warning or
everything will turn into pumpkins and mice. Mr. Market is there to serve you, not to guide you. It is
his pocketbook, not his wisdom, that you will find useful. If he shows up someday in a particularly
foolish mood, you are free to either ignore him, or take advantage of him, but it will be disastrous if
you fall under his influence. Indeed, if you aren't certain that you understand and can value your
business far better than Mr. Market, you don't belong in the game." Clearly, Buffet evaluates his
investment decisions quite differently from those who are extremely worried when the market crashes
or euphoric when it soars. And because he evaluates differently, he produces a different quality of
result. If someone is doing better than we are in any area of life, it's simply because they have a
better way of evaluating what things mean and what they should do about it. We must never forget
that the impact of our evaluations goes far beyond hockey or finances. How you evaluate what you're
going to eat each night may determine the length and quality of your life. Poor evaluations of how to
raise your kids can create the potential for lifelong pain. Failure to understand someone else's
evaluation procedures can destroy a beautiful and loving relationship.
The goal, then, is to be able to evaluate everything in your life in a way that consistently guides you to
make choices that produce the results you desire. The challenge is that seldom do we take control of
what seems like a complex process. But I've developed ways to simplify it so that we can take the
helm and begin steering our own evaluation procedures, and therefore our destinies. Here is a brief
overview of the five elements of evaluation, some of which you already know, and the rest of which
we'll be covering in the following chapters. Below you'll find an arrow pointed toward twin targets. This
diagram demonstrates how our Master System of evaluation works. Let's review the five elements one
at a time and add each to the diagram as we go.
1) The first element that affects all of your evaluations is the mental and emotional state you're in
while you're making an evaluation. There are times in your life when somebody can say one thing to
you and it will make you cry, while other times the same comment makes you laugh.
What's the difference? It might simply be the state you're in. When you're in a fearful, vulnerable state,
the crunching of footsteps outside your window in the night, along with the creak of a door opening,
will feel and mean something totally different than if you're in a state of excitement or positive
anticipation. Whether you quiver under the sheets or leap out and run to the door with open arms is
the result of the evaluations you make about the meaning of these sounds. One major key to making
superior evaluations, then, is to make certain that when we're making decisions about what things
mean and what to do, we're in an extremely resourceful state of mind and emotion rather than in a
survival mode.
2) The second building block of our Master System is the questions we ask. Questions create the initial
form of our evaluations. Remember, in response to anything that happens in your life, your brain
evaluates it by asking, "What is happening? What does this situation mean? Does it mean pain or
pleasure? What can I do now to avoid, reduce, or eliminate pain or gain some pleasure?" What
determines whether you ask somebody out for a date? Your evaluations are deeply affected by the
specific question you ask yourself as you consider approaching this person. If you ask yourself a
question like "Wouldn't it be great to get to know this person?", you're likely to feel motivated to
approach them. If, however, you habitually ask questions like "What if they reject me? What if they're
offended when I approach them? What if I get hurt?" then obviously these questions will lead you
through a set of evaluations that result in your passing up the opportunity to connect with someone
you're truly interested in.
What determines the kind of food you'll put on your dinner plate also depends on the questions you
ask. If when you look at food, you consistently ask the question "What could I eat quickly that would
give me an immediate lift?", the foods you may choose will tend to be heavily processed convenience
foods—in layman's terms, junk. If instead you asked, "What could I have now that would nourish me?",
it's more likely you'll pull from such food groups as fruits, juices, vegetables, and salads.
The difference between having a Snickers bar on a regular basis or having a glass of fresh-squeezed
juice will determine the quality of your physical body, and this has resulted from the way you've
evaluated. Your habitual questions play a major role in this process.
3) The third element that affects your evaluations is your hierarchy of values. Each of us throughout
our lives has learned to value certain emotions more than others. We all want to feel good, i.e.,
pleasure, and avoid feeling bad, i.e., pain., But our life's experience has taught each of us a unique
coding system for what equals pain and what equals pleasure. This can be found in the guidance
system of our values. For example, one person may have learned to link pleasure to the idea of feeling
secure, while someone else may have linked pain to the same idea because their family's obsession
with security caused them never to experience a sense of freedom. Some people try to succeed, yet at
the same time they avoid rejection at all costs. Can you see how this values conflict might cause a
person to feel frustrated or immobilized?
The values you select will shape every decision you make in your life. There are two types of values
you'll learn about in the next chapter: the emotional states of pleasure we're always trying to move
toward—values like love, joy, compassion, and excitement—and the emotional states of pain that
we're trying to avoid or move away from—like humiliation102, frustration, depression, and anger. The
dynamic created by these two targets will determine the direction of your life.
4) The fourth element that makes up your Master System is beliefs. Our global beliefs give us a sense
of certainty about how to feel and what to expect from ourselves, from life, and from people; our rules
are the beliefs we have about what has to happen for us to feel that our values have been met. For
example, some people believe, "If you love me, then you never raise your voice." This rule will cause
this person to evaluate a raised voice as evidence that there is no love in the relationship. This may
have no basis in fact, but the rule will dominate the evaluation and therefore that person's perceptions
and experience of what's true. Other such limiting rules might be ideas like "If you're successful, then
you make millions of dollars" or "If you're a good parent, then you never have a conflict with your
children."
Our global beliefs determine our expectations and often control what we're even willing to evaluate in
the first place. Together, the force of these beliefs determines when we give ourselves an experience
of pain or pleasure, and they are a core element in every evaluation we'll ever make.
5) The fifth element of your Master System is the hodgepodge of reference experiences you can access
from the giant filing cabinet you call your brain. In it, you've stored everything you've ever
experienced in your life—and, for that matter, everything you've ever imagined. These references form
102

humiliation Demütigung, Erniedrigung
the raw material that we use to construct our beliefs and guide our decisions. In order to decide what
something means to us, we have to compare it to something; for example, is this situation good or
bad? Think of the tennis example earlier in this chapter: is it good or bad, compared to what? Is it
good compared to what your friends do or have?
Is it bad compared to the worst situation you've ever heard of? You have unlimited references you can
use in making any decision. Which references you choose will determine the meaning you take from
any experience, how you feel about it, and to a certain extent what you'll do.
Without a doubt, references shape our beliefs and values. Can you see how it would make a difference,
for example, if you grew up in an environment where you felt you were consistently being taken
advantage of, as opposed to growing up feeling unconditionally loved? How might this color your
beliefs or your values, the way you looked at life or people or opportunity?
If, for example, you had learned skydiving when you were sixteen years old, you might develop
different values about the idea of adventure than someone who was rejected every time they
attempted a new skill, concept, or idea. Masters are often people who just have more references
than you do about what leads to success or frustration in any given situation. Clearly, after forty years
of investing, John Templeton has more references to assist him in deciding what is an excellent
investment than someone who is putting together their, first deal.
Additional references offer us the potential for mastery. Yet, regard- less of our experience or lack
thereof, we have unlimited ways to organize our references into beliefs and rules that either empower
or disempower us. Each day you and I have the opportunity to take in new references that can help us
to bolster our beliefs, refine our values, ask new questions, access the states that propel us in the
direction we want to go, and truly shape our destinies for the better.
"Men are wise in proportion103, not to their experience, but to their capacity for experience."
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
Several years ago, I began to hear about the incredible success of a man named Dwayne Chapman in
tracking down and capturing felons who had eluded104 the law for years. Known to most as "Dog," he
has become known as the top bounty105 hunter in the country. I was fascinated and wanted to meet
him and discover what makes him so effective. Dog is a deeply spiritual man whose goal is not only to
catch the felon, but also to help him make changes in his life. Where did this desire come from? It
came from his own pain.
As a young man. Dog made poor evaluations about whom he chose as friends. Out of his desire to
belong to a group, he joined a motorcycle gang, the Devil's Disciples. One day, in the midst of a drug
deal gone bad, a gang member shot and mortally wounded a man at the scene. Panic ensued106; the

103

proportion 1. Verhältnis; (An)Teil; proportions Plural Größenverhältnisse Plural, Proportionen Plural; in
proportion to im Verhältnis zu; 2. (to) in das richtige Verhältnis bringen (mit, zu); anpassen (Dativ)
104
elude geschickt entgehen, ausweichen, sich entziehen (alle Dativ); übertragen nicht einfallen (Dativ)
105
bounty Freigebigkeit; großzügige Spende; Prämie
106
ensue (darauf-, nach)folgen
members immediately fled. Although Dog did not commit107 the murder, in that state there was no line
drawn between being an accessory108 to murder and being the man who actually pulled the trigger. He
ended up serving years of hard time, working on a chain gang, in the Texas prison system. Doing time
gave him so much pain that he reevaluated his entire philosophy of life. He began to realize that his
core beliefs, values, and rules had created his pain. He began to ask himself new questions and to
focus on his prison experiences (references) as being the effect of choices he'd made with his previous
life philosophy.
This got him to the point where he believed he must change his life once and for all. In the years
following his release. Dog pursued a number of colorful careers and finally settled on starting a private
investigation business. When he was brought before a judge for back child-support payments
(payments he'd been unable to make while in prison and in the financially unstable period following his
release), the judge offered Dog a money-making opportunity in lieu of a payment he knew would
never materialize. He suggested that Dog track down109 a rapist who had victimized many women in
the Denver area. The judge suggested Dog use the distinctions he'd made in prison to assist him in
figuring out what this criminal might be doing and where he might be hiding. Although law
enforcement officials had tried unsuccessfully to find this rapist for over a year. Dog delivered him
within three days!
To say the least, the judge was impressed. This was the start of a brilliant career, and today, more
than 3,000 arrests later. Dog has one of the best records in the country, if not the best. He has
averaged over 360 arrests a year—essentially one arrest a day. What is the key to his success?
Certainly a critical factor is the evaluations he makes. Dog interviews his quarry110's relatives or loved
ones, and in a variety of ways he elicits the information he needs. He discovers some of the beliefs,
values, and habitual rules of the man or woman he's pursuing. He now understands their life
references, which enables him to think the same way they would and anticipate their moves with
uncanny precision. He understands their Master System and his results speak for themselves.

TWO KINDS OF CHANGE
If you and I want to change anything in our lives, it's invariably one of two things: either how we're
feeling or our behaviors. Certainly we can learn how to change our emotions or feelings within a
context. For example, if you feel fearful of being rejected as an actor, I can help you to condition
yourself so that you no longer feel fearful. Or we can make the second kind of change: a global change.
A metaphor for this might be that if we want to change the way your computer is processing data, I
can change the software that you're using so that when you hit the keys what shows up on the screen
is formatted differently. Or if I really want to make a change that will not only affect this type of file,
107
commit (-tt-) anvertrauen, übergeben; RECHT jemanden einweisen (to in Akkusativ); Verbrechen begehen;
verpflichten (to zu), festlegen (to auf Akkusativ)
108
accessory RECHT Komplize, Komplizin, Mitschuldige(r); meistens accessories Plural Zubehör, Mode: auch
Accessoires Plural; TECHNIK Zubehör(teile Plural)
109
track down aufspüren; auftreiben
110
quarry Steinbruch quarry JAGDWESEN Beute, auch übertragen Opfer
but multiple environments, I can change the computer's operating system. By changing the Master
System, we can change how you'll interact in a variety of circumstances.
So instead of just conditioning yourself to feel differently about rejection and eliminating the fearful
behaviors, you can adopt a new global belief that says, "I am the source of all my emotions. Nothing
and no one can change how I feel except me. If I find myself in reaction to anything, I can change it in
a moment." If you truly adopt this belief, not intellectually, but emotionally where you feel it with
absolute certainty, can you see how that would eliminate not only your fear of rejection, but also your
feelings of anger or frustration or inadequacy?
Suddenly, you become the master of your fate. Or we could change your values, and make your
highest value one of contributing. Then, if somebody rejected you, it wouldn't matter: you'd still want
to contribute to them, and through constant contribution, you'd find yourself no longer being rejected
by people. You'd also find yourself permeated with a sense of joy and connection that you may never
have had before in other areas of your life. Or we can change your conditioned feelings toward
smoking by getting you to move health and vitality to the top of your values list. Once that becomes
the highest priority of your life, the smoking behavior will disappear, and more importantly, it can be
replaced by other behaviors that will support your new value of health and vitality: eating differently,
breathing differently, and so on. Both types of changes are valuable.
The focus of the second section of the book is how to create these global changes, where a single shift
in one of the five elements of the Master System will powerfully affect the way you think, feel, and
behave in multiple areas of your life simultaneously. If you change just one element in your Master
System, there are certain evaluations you won't even consider anymore, certain questions you won't
even ask, certain beliefs the computer won't even accept. This process of creating a global change can
be a powerful force for shaping destiny.
"Take away the cause, and the effect ceases111."
MIGUEL DE CERVANTES
There's a story I love to tell of a fellow standing on the banks of a river. Suddenly, he sees someone
caught in the raging current, bounced about on the jagged112 rocks, and hears him calling for help. He
leaps113 in, pulls the drowning man to safety, gives him mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, attends to the
man's wounds, and calls for medical help. As he's still catching his breath, he hears two more screams
emanating from the river. Again, he jumps in and makes another daring rescue, this time of two
young women. Before he even has a chance to think, he hears four more people calling for help.
Pretty soon the man is exhausted, having rescued victim after victim, and yet the screams continue. If
only he had taken the time to travel a short distance upriver, he could have discovered who was
throwing all those people in the water in the first place! He could have saved all his efforts by
addressing the problem at its cause rather than its effect.

111
112
113

cease aufhören; beenden
jagged gezackt, zackig
leap 1. (leapt oder leaped) springen; leap at übertragen sich stürzen auf; 2. Sprung
Similarly, understanding the Master System allows you to eliminate the cause instead of exhausting
yourself fighting the effects. One of the finest programs I ever designed is my three-day Date With
Destiny seminar. Instead of the usual 2,000 participants, I limit this program to 200 people. At Date
With Destiny, we work together to assist each person to understand exactly how their Master System
is set up.
This understanding transforms people: suddenly they understand why they feel the things they feel
and do the things they do. They also learn how to change virtually anything in their lives. Most
importantly, we then have them design what their Master System needs to be in order for them to
achieve their ultimate purpose in life. How can they organize themselves so they can be effortlessly
pulled in the direction of their desires rather than be pulled apart by a sense of conflicting values,
beliefs, or rules?
Some of the most important questions we ask in this program are "What are the values that are
controlling me? How do I know when my values are being met—what are my rules?" Date With Destiny
has been attended not only by U.S. senators and congressmen. Fortune 500 CEOs, and movie stars,
but also by people from every walk of life. All of us have in common some of the same challenges.
How do we deal with disappointment, frustration, failure, and certain events in our environment that
we can't control no matter how successful we become?
The emotions we feel and the actions we take are based on how we evaluate things. And yet, most of
us have not set up this system of evaluation for ourselves. The profound changes that people
experience in this program in a mere three days are beyond words. People literally change the way
they think and the way they feel about their lives in a matter of moments, because they take control of
the portion of their brain that controls their experience of life. The changes end up being emotional
and even physical as the brain sets new priorities for what's most important. While this book is not a
replacement for Date With Destiny, I want to provide the same foundational tools that we use in that
program for your immediate use. With the chapters that follow, you can produce the same kinds of
changes in your life starting now.

TEST WHAT YOU'VE LEARNED
To stimulate your thinking about how your Master System works, let me ask you a few provocative
questions that should open the floodgates of your thought and help you to identify how different
portions of your system are used to make decisions.
ANSWER THE FOLLOWING FOUR QUESTIONS BEFORE YOU READ ON:
1. What is your most treasured memory?
2. If you could end world hunger today by killing one innocent person, would you? Why or why not?
3. If you bumped a red Porsche and scratched it, and no one was around, would you leave a note?
Why or why not?
4. If you could earn $10,000 for eating a bowlful of live cockroaches, would you? Why or why not?
Now let's review how you answered each of these questions. As you look at the diagram of your Master
System, which of the five areas of evaluation did you use to answer the first question? Certainly you
asked a question of yourself in order to begin to evaluate—you probably repeated the question I asked.
The answer, though, was retrieved from your references, wasn't it? You picked through the myriad
experiences you've had in your life, and finally selected one as your most treasured memory. Or
maybe you failed to select one because you have a belief that says, "All experiences of life are
treasured" or "Selecting one over another will be denigrating to some other life experience." Those
beliefs would prevent you from answering the question. You see, our Master System of evaluation not
only determines what we evaluate and how we evaluate, but even what we're willing to evaluate.
Let's review the second question, one that is more intense and which I read in The Book of Questions:
If you could end world hunger today by killing one innocent person, would you? When I ask people this
question, I usually get a rather intense set of answers. Some people say, "Absolutely," their rationale
being that the lives of the many outweigh the life of an individual. The way they see it, if one person
were willing to suffer, and it would end all suffering on earth, the end would justify the means. Others
are aghast114 at this thought. They believe every human life is valuable. That's also based on a set of
beliefs, isn't it? Others have a global belief that everything in life is exactly as it should be, and that all
these people who are starving are getting invaluable lessons for their next incarnation. And some
people say, "Yes, I would do it, but I'd take my own life." It's interesting how individuals respond with
such varying reactions to the same question based on which of the five elements of evaluation they
use and the content they've stored.
How about the third question: If you bumped a red Porsche and scratched it, and no one was around,
would you leave a note? Some people would say, "Absolutely." Why? Their highest value is honesty.
Other people say, "Absolutely," but the reason they would do it is that one of the things they avoid
most in the world is guilt. Not leaving a note would make them feel guilty, and that's too painful.
Others will say, "I wouldn't leave a note," and when asked why they'll say, "Well, it's happened to me
several times, and nobody left me a note." So they're saying they have personal references that made
them develop the belief, "Do unto others as they've done unto you."
Here's the fourth question: If you could earn $10,000 for eating a bowlful of live cockroaches, would
you? Invariably I get very few affirmative responses. Why? Most people's references for cockroaches
the images and sensations that they've stored in their bodies—are intensely negative. Certainly
cockroaches are not something they'd want to put in their systems. But then I raise the ante: How
many of you would do it for $100,000? Gradually there is a shift in the room as people begin to raise
their hands who previously had said no. Why will they suddenly do it for $100,000? Well, what
happened to their evaluation system? Two things: I asked a different question by changing one word,
and second, they have a belief that $100,000 could eliminate a lot of pain in their lives, maybe some
of the long-term pain that would be more difficult to deal with than the short-term pain of live
cockroaches squiggling down their throats.
How about $1 million? How about $10 million? Suddenly the majority of the people in the room are
raising their hands. They believe the long-term pleasure that the $10 million would allow them to give
114

aghast entgeistert, entsetzt
to themselves and others would far outweigh the short-term pain. Still, some people would not eat live
cockroaches for any amount of money.
When asked why not, they say things like "I could never kill a living thing" or "What goes around
comes around." Other people say, "I kill cockroaches all the time, just because they're in my way!"
One man even said he could eat them easily, and that he would do it for fun, not the money! Why?
The reason is that he grew up in a country where cockroaches and other insects are considered a
delicacy. Different people have different references and different ways of evaluating things—interesting,
isn't it?

THERE COMES A TIME . . .
As we study these five elements of the Master System, there's one other theme we need to bear in
mind: it's certainly possible to overevaluate.
Human beings love to analyze things to death. There is a point, however, when we've got to stop
evaluating and take action. For example, some people make so many evaluations that even a minor
decision turns into a major production: maybe they can't get themselves to exercise regularly as part
of their lifestyle. Why? They see it as a major production. The way they "chunk" the experience, the
way they look at it, there are so many steps that they're intimidated.
In order to exercise, they must 1) get up; 2) find some workout wear they don't look too fat in; 3) pick
out the right athletic shoes; 4) pack everything up in their gym bag; 5) schlepp over to the gym; 6)
find a parking spot; 7) climb the stairs; 8) sign in; 9) go into the locker room; 10) squeeze into the
workout clothes; and 11) finally attend the class, hit the stationary bicycle, and sweat like crazy. And
then when they're done, 12) they have to do all of this again in reverse.
Of course, these same people can easily get themselves to go to the beach. They're ready in a
heartbeat! If you ask them why, they'll tell you, "Well, to go to the beach, you just hop in the car and
go!" They don't stop to evaluate each and every step along the way; they see it as one giant step,
evaluating only whether to go or not, not every little detail. Sometimes evaluating too many details
can cause us to feel over- loaded or overwhelmed. One of the things we'll learn here, then, is to put
many minor steps together into one big "chunk"—one giant step, if you will—that the minute you take
it you'll get the result that you want.
In this section, we're going to analyze our evaluation system, put it together in a way that makes
sense, and then start using it instead of deliberating about it. As you continue through the next few
chapters, realize that you have an opportunity to create leverage on yourself that will produce
changes you may never have thought possible before.
So let's cut right to the chase115. I'll be coaching you on revealing what your present evaluation system
is and setting up a new Master System that is consistently empowering. You already know the power
of state and questions, so let's proceed to the third area of evaluations. Let's look at...

115

chase 1. Jagd; Verfolgung; 2. jagen, hetzen; Jagd machen auf (Akkusativ); rasen, rennen
15
LIFE VALUES: YOUR PERSONAL COMPASS

"Nothing splendid116 has ever been achieved except by those who dared believe that something inside
of them was superior to circumstance."
BRUCE BARTON

Courage, determination, perseverance, dedication ... As Ross Perot conducted the tense briefing in
Dallas, he saw those qualities reflected in the faces of the men he had handpicked for an extraordinary
rescue mission. In the early days of 1979, civil unrest and anti-America hysteria were rising to a fever
pitch in Iran, and only a few days before, two of Perot's corporate executives in Teheran had been
inexplicably jailed. Bail117 was set at $13 million. When high-powered diplomatic negotiations failed to
get results, Perot decided that there was only one way to get his men out: he'd have to do it himself.
Calling upon the expertise of legendary army colonel Arthur "Bull" Simons to lead this daring raid,
Perot quickly assembled a crack team of his top executives to pull off the jailbreak. They were selected
because they'd all been in Teheran and had military experience. He called his men "Eagles" to signify
"high fliers who used their initiative, got the job done, and gave results, not excuses."
The rewards would be high if they won, but the risks were even greater: the mission was completely
unauthorized, and not only was failure a possibility, but so was death. What drove Ross Perot to
muster118 all his resources, to take the risks and defy the odds? Clearly, he's a man who lives by his
values. Courage, loyalty, love, commitment, and deter- mination are all values that give him an
exceptional capacity to care and a strength of will that is legendary. These same values were the force
that drove him to build his company, EDS (Electronic Data Systems Corporation), from a thousanddollar investment into an enterprise worth billions of dollars. He rose to the top because of his capacity
to evaluate and select the right men. He chose them based on a strict code of values and he knew that
with the right people, those who held high enough standards, all he'd have to do was give them the
job to do and get out of their way.
Now he would have the ultimate test of the people he'd selected as he called upon them to summon
their finest resources and rescue a few members of the corporate "family." The story of their mission
and the challenges they met can be found in the book On Wings of Eagles. Suffice119 it to say that

116

splendid großartig, herrlich, prächtig
bail 1. Bürge; Kaution; be out on bail gegen Kaution auf freiem Fuß sein; go oder stand bail for someone
für jemanden Kaution stellen; 2. bail out jemanden gegen Kaution freibekommen; Am. LUFTFAHRT siehe bale2
118
muster 1. muster up seine Kraft und so weiter aufbieten; seinen Mut zusammennehmen; 2. pass muster
übertragen Zustimmung finden (with bei); den Anforderungen genügen
119
suffice genügen, (aus)reichen
117
despite obstacles beyond compare, Perot's heroic rescue mission succeeded and brought home his
most valued assets: his people.
"A man's character is his guardian divinity."
HERACLITUS
Values guide our every decision and, therefore, our destiny. Those who know their values and live by
them become the leaders of our society. They are exemplified by outstanding individuals throughout
our nation, from the boardroom to the classroom. For example, did you see the movie Stand and
Deliver? It told the story of the maverick math teacher Jaime Escalante.
Were you as inspired as I was by the heroic strides he made in transmitting to his students his passion
for learning? He got them to associate in their nervous systems, at the deepest level, a sense of pride
in their capacity to master those things others were certain they could never learn. His example of
commitment translated to these young people the power of values. They learned from him discipline,
confidence, the importance of the team, flexibility, and the power of absolute determination.
He didn't talk to these kids in the barrio about what they should do with their lives; he was a living
demonstration, a new definition of what was possible. He not only got them to pass a calculus
placement test in numbers that everyone thought were impossible, but he also got them to change
their beliefs about who they were and what they were capable of if they consistently committed to
holding themselves to a higher standard.
If we want the deepest level of life fulfillment, we can achieve it in only one way, and that is by doing
what these two men have done: by deciding upon what we value most in life, what our highest values
are, and then committing to live by them every single day. Unfortunately, this action is far too rare in
today's society. Too often, people have no clear idea of what's important to them. They waffle on any
issue; the world is a mass of gray to them; they never take a stand tor anything or anyone.
If you and I are not clear about what's most important in our lives-what we truly stand for—then how
can we ever expect to lay the foundation for a sense of self-esteem, much less have the capacity to
make effective decisions? If you've ever found yourself in a situation where you had a tough time
making a decision about something, the reason is that you weren't clear about what you value most
within that situation. We must remember that all decision making comes down to values clarification.
When you know what's most important to you, making a decision is quite simple. Most people, though,
are unclear about what's most important in their lives, and thus decision making becomes a form of
internal torture. This is not true for those who've clearly defined the highest principles of their lives. It
wasn't tough for Ross Perot to know what to do. His values dictated it. They acted as his personal
compass to guide him through a situation fraught with peril. Recently, Escalante left the Los Angeles
school system that he'd been working in to move to northern California. Why? He could no longer be a
part of an organization where he believed there were no standards for a teacher's performance.
Who are the most universally admired and respected people in our culture? Aren't they those who have
a solid grasp of their own values, people who not only profess their standards, but live by them? We
all respect people who take a stand for what they believe, even if we don't concur with their ideas
about what's right and what's wrong. There is power in individuals who congruently lead lives where
their philosophies and actions are one.
Most often we recognize this unique state of the human condition as an individual with integrity.
Culturally, these people have come in many forms, from the John Waynes and Ross Perots, to the Bob
Hopes and Jerry Lewises, to the Martin Sheens and Ralph Naders, to the Norman Cousinses and Walter
Cronkites. The fact of the matter is that those we perceive to be congruent in their values have a
tremendous capacity to have an influence within our culture.
Do you remember the nightly newscasts with Walter Cronkite? Walter was with us on all the most
important days of our lives: during tragedies and triumphs, when John F. Kennedy was assassinated,
and when Neil Armstrong first set toot on the moon. Walter was part of our family. We trusted him
implicitly.
At the beginning of the Vietnam War, he reported on it in the standard way, with an objective view of
our involvement, but after visiting Vietnam his view of the war changed, and his values of integrity and
honesty required that, rightly or wrongly, he communicate his disillusionment. Regardless of whether
you agreed with him or not, the impact he had may have been one of the final straws that caused
many in Middle America to begin to question the war for the first time. Now it wasn't just a few radical
students protesting Vietnam, but "Uncle Walt."
The conflict in Vietnam was truly a values conflict within our culture. People's perception of what was
right and wrong, what could make a difference, was the battle fought at home while the boys overseas
put their blood and guts on the line, some not knowing why. An inconsistency of values among our
leaders has been one of the greatest sources of pain in our culture. Watergate certainly wounded many
Americans. Yet, through it all, our country has continued to grow and expand because there are
individuals who continually come forth to demonstrate what's possible and hold us to a higher
standard—whether it's Bob Geldof focusing the attention of the world on the famine in Africa or Ed
Roberts mobilizing the political forces necessary to change the quality of life for the physically
challenged.
"Every time a value is born, existence takes on a new meaning; every time one dies, some
part of that meaning passes away."
JOSEPH WOOD KRUTCH
We need to realize that the direction of our lives is controlled by the magnetic pull of our values. They
are the force in front of us, consistently leading us to make decisions that create the direction and
ultimate destination of our lives. This is true, not only for us as individuals, but also for the companies,
organizations, and the nation of which we're a pan.
Clearly, the values that our Founding Fathers held most dear have shaped our nation's destiny: the
values of freedom, choice, equality, a sense of community, hard work, individuality, challenge,
competition, prosperity, and respect for those who have the strength to overcome great adversity have
consistently sculpted the experience of American life and thus our joint destinies. These values have
caused us to be an ever expanding country that innovates and continually provides a vision of
possibility for people the world over.
Would a different set of national and cultural values have shaped our country differently? You bet!
What if the value held most important by our forefathers was stability? Or conformity? How would that
have changed the face of our great land? In China, for example, one of the highest values in the
culture is the value of the group versus that of the individual, the idea that an individual's needs must
be subservient to the group's. How has this shaped Chinese life differently than American life?
The fact is, within our own nation there are constant shifts going on within the values of the culture as
a whole. While there are certain foundational values, significant emotional events can create
shifts in individuals and therefore in the companies, organizations, and countries that they
make up. The changes in Eastern Europe are clearly the most profound value shifts that
have occurred in the world community in our lifetimes.
What happens with countries and individuals also happens with companies. IBM is an example of a
corporation whose direction and destiny was set up by its founder, Tom Watson. How? He clearly
defined what the company stood for, what would be most important for all people to experience
regardless of what products, services, or financial climates they would enter in the future. He guided
"Big Blue" into being one of the world's largest and most successful companies.
What can we learn from all this? In our personal and professional lives, as well as on the global front,
we must get clear about what is most important in our lives and decide that we will live by
these values, no matter what happens. This consistency must occur regardless of whether the
environment rewards us for living by our standards or not. We must live by our principles even when it
"rains on our parade," even if no one gives us the support we need. The only way for us to have longterm happiness is to live by our highest ideals, to consistently act in accordance with what we believe
our life is truly about.
But we can't do this it we don't clearly know what our values are! This is the biggest tragedy in
most people's lives: many people know what they want to have, but have no idea of who they
want to be. Getting "things" simply will not fulfill you. Only living and doing what you believe is "the
right thing" will give you that sense of inner strength that we all deserve.
Remember that your values—whatever they are—are the compass that is guiding you to
your ultimate destiny. They are creating your life path by guiding you to make certain decisions and
take certain actions consistently. Not using your internal compass intelligently results in frustration,
disappointment, lack of fulfillment, and a nagging sense that life could be more if only somehow,
something were different. On the other hand, there's an unbelievable power in living your values: a
sense of certainty, an inner peace, a total congruency that few people ever experience.

IF YOU DON'T KNOW YOUR TRUE VALUES, PREPARE FOR PAIN
The only way we can ever feel happy and fulfilled in the long term is to live in accordance with our true
values. If we don't, we're sure to experience intense pain. So often, people develop habitual patterns
of behavior that frustrate or could potentially destroy them: smoking, drinking, overeating, abusing
drugs, attempting to control or dominate others, watching hour upon hour of television, and so on.
What's the real problem here? These behaviors are really the result of frustration, anger, and
emptiness that people feel because they don't have a sense of fulfillment in their lives. They're trying
to distract themselves from those empty feelings by filling the gap with the behavior that produces a
"quick fix" change of state. This behavior becomes a pattern, and people often focus on changing the
behavior itself rather than dealing with the cause. They don't just have a drinking problem; they have
a values problem. The only reason they're drinking is to try to change their emotional state because
they don't like the way they feel, moment by moment. They don't know what's most important to
them in their lives.
The consolation is that whenever we do live by our highest standards, whenever we fulfill and meet
our values, we feel immense joy. We don't need the excess food or drink. We don't need to put
ourselves into a stupor, because life itself becomes so incredibly rich without these excesses.
Distracting ourselves from such incredible heights would be like taking sleeping pills on Christmas
morning.
Guess what the challenge is! As always, we were already asleep when the essence of what would
shape our lives was formed. We were children who didn't understand the importance of having a clear
sense of our values, or adults dealing with the pressures of life, already distracted to the point where
we couldn't direct the formation of our values. I must reiterate that every decision is guided by
these values, and in most cases, we didn't set them up.
If I asked you to make a list of your top ten values in life, to write them in precise order of importance,
I'd be willing to bet that only one in 10,000 could do it. (And that Vioodi of a percent would have
attended my Date With Destiny seminar!) But if you don't know the answer to this question, how can
you make any clear decisions at all? How can you make choices that you know in the long term will
meet your deepest emotional needs? It's hard to hit a target when you don't know what it is! Knowing
your values is critical to being able to live them.
Anytime you have difficulty making an important decision, you can be sure that it's the
result of being unclear about your values. What if you were asked to move your family across the
country in connection with a new job? If you knew that there was some risk involved, but that the
compensation would be better and the job would be more interesting, what would you do? How you
answer this question will depend entirely on what's most important to you: personal growth or security?
Adventure or comfort?
By the way, what determines whether you value adventure more than comfort? Your values came from
a mixed bag of experiences, of lifelong conditioning through punishment and reward. Your parents
congratulated and supported you when you did things that agreed with their values, and when you
clashed with their values, you were punished either physically, verbally, or through the pain of being
ignored. Your teachers, too, encouraged and applauded you when you did things they agreed with, and
applied similar forms of punishment when you violated their most deeply held views. This cycle was
perpetuated by your friends and employers. You modeled the values of your heroes, and maybe some
of your antiheroes as well.
Today, new economic factors come into play. With most families having both parents working outside
the home, there is no traditional role model for values in the home. Schools, churches, and, on the less
appetizing side, TV have all stepped in to fill the gap. Indeed, TV is our most convenient babysitter,
with the average person now watching television seven hours a day! Am I suggesting that the
"traditional" family structure is the only way to raise children who have strong values? Of course not.
What I suggest is that we teach our children our philosophy of life by being strong role models, by
knowing our own values and living by them.

WHAT ARE VALUES?
To value something means to place importance upon it; anything that you hold dear can be called a
"value." In this chapter, I'm specifically referring to life values, those things that are most important to
you in life. For this kind of value, there are two types: ends and means. If I ask you, "What do you
value most?," you might answer, "Love, family, money . . ." Of these, love is the end value you're
pursuing; in other words, the emotional state you desire. Conversely, family and money are merely
means values. In other words, they are simply a way for you to trigger the emotional states you really
desire.
If I asked you, "What does family give you?," you might say, "Love, security, happiness." What you
tmly value—the ends you're after—are love, security, and happiness. Similarly, with money, I could
ask you, "What does money really mean to you? What does it give you?" You might say, "Freedom,
impact, the ability to contribute, a sense of security." Again, you see, money is merely a means to
achieving a much deeper set of values, a set of emotions that you desire to experience on a consistent
basis in your life.
The challenge in life is that most people are not clear on the difference between means and ends
values, and therefore, they experience a lot of pain. So often people are too busy pursuing means
values that they don't achieve their true desire: their ends values. The ends values are those that will
fulfill you, make your life rich and rewarding. One of the biggest challenges I see is that people keep
setting goals without knowing what they truly value in life, and therefore they end up achieving their
goals and saying, "Is this all there is?"
For example, let's say a woman's highest values are caring and contribution, and she chooses to
become an attorney because she once met a lawyer who really impressed her as being able to make a
difference and help people through his work. As time goes by, she gets caught up in the whirlwind of
practicing law, and aspires to become a partner in her firm.
As she pursues this position, her work takes on an entirely different focus. She begins to dominate and
run the firm, and becomes one of the most successful women she knows, yet she feels unhappy
because she no longer has any contact with clients. Her position has created a different relationship
with her peers, and she spends all her time in meetings ironing out protocol and procedure. She
achieved her goal, but missed out on her life's desire. Have you ever fallen into this trap of pursuing
the means as if they were the end you were after? In order to be truly happy, we must know the
difference, and be sure to pursue the end itself.

MOVING-TOWARD VALUES
While it's absolutely true that you and I are constantly motivated to move toward pleasurable
emotional states, it's also true that we value some emotions more than others. For example, what are
the emotional states that you value most in life? What are the emotions that you think will give you
the most pleasure? Love or success? Freedom or intimacy? Adventure or security?
I call these pleasurable states that we value most moving-toward values because these are the
emotional states we'll do the most to attain. What are some of the feelings that are most important
for you to experience in your life on a consistent basis? When asked this question at seminars, my
audiences invariably respond with words like:
Love
Success
Freedom
Intimacy
Security
Adventure
Power
Passion
Comfort
Health
It's certainly true that you probably value all of these emotions, and that they're all important for you
to feel. But wouldn't it be fair to say that you don't value them all equally? Obviously there are
some emotional states that you'll do more to achieve than others. In truth, we all have a
hierarchy of values. Each person who looks at this list will see some emotional states as being more
important to them than others. The hierarchy of your values is controlling the way you make decisions
in each moment. Some people value comfort over passion, or freedom over security, or intimacy over
success.
Take a moment right now, and discover from this list which of these emotions you value most. Simply
rewrite the list in your order of importance, with 1 being the emotional state you hold as most
important, and 10 being least important. Please take a moment now and fill in the blanks in your
order of importance.
"Be more concerned with your character than your reputation, because your character is what you
really are, while your reputation is merely what others think you are."
JOHN WOODEN
So what did you learn by doing this ranking? If I were sitting next to you, I could probably give you
some quality feedback. For example, I'd know a lot about you if your number-one value was freedom,
followed by passion, adventure, and power. I know you're going to make different decisions than
someone whose top values are security, comfort, intimacy, and health. Do you think a person whose
number-one value is adventure makes decisions the same way as someone whose number-one value
is security? Do you think these people would drive the same kind of car? Take the same kind of
vacation? Seek out the same profession? Far from it.
Remember, whatever your values are, they affect the direction of your life. We have all learned
through our life's experience that certain emotions give us more pleasure than others. For example,
some people have learned that the way to have the most pleasurable emotions in life is to have a
sense of control, so they pursue it with incredible vigor. It becomes the dominant focus of all their
actions: it shapes who they will have relationships with, what they will do within those relationships,
and how they'll live. It also causes them, as you can imagine, to feel quite uncomfortable in any
environment where they're not in charge.
Conversely, some people link pain to the idea of control. What they want more than anything else is a
sense of freedom and adventure. Therefore, they make decisions completely differently. Others get
the same level of pleasure through a different emotion: contribution. This value causes that person to
constantly ask, "What can I give? How can I make a difference?" This' would certainly send them in a
different direction from someone whose highest value was control.
Once you know what your values are, you can clearly understand why you head in the directions that
you do on a consistent basis. Also, by seeing the hierarchy of your values, you can see why
sometimes you have difficulty making decisions or why there may be conflicts in your life. For example,
if a person's number-one value is freedom, and number two is intimacy, these two incompatible values
are so closely ranked that often this person will have challenges.
I remember a man I counseled at one time who was constantly feeling this push-pull. He consistently
sought autonomy, but when he achieved it, he felt alone and craved intimacy. Then, as he pursued
intimacy, he became fearful he would lose his freedom, and so he'd sabotage the relationship. One
particular relationship was continually on-again, off-again while he cycled between these two values.
After I helped him make a simple change in the hierarchy of his values, his relationship and his life was
instantly changed. Shifting priorities produces power. Knowing your own values helps you to get more
clarity as to why you do what you do and how you can live more consistently, but knowing the values
of others is equally important. Might it be valuable to know the values of someone you're in a
relationship with, or somebody you're in business with? Knowing a person's values gives you a fix on
their compass, and allows you to have insight into their decision making. Knowing your own hierarchy
is also absolutely critical because your top values are those that are going to bring you the most
happiness. Of course, what you really want to do is set it up so that you're meeting all of your
values every day. If you don't, you'll experience what seems like an inexplicable feeling of emptiness
or unhappiness.
My daughter, Jolie, lives an incredibly rich life in which her highest values are almost always met. She
is also a wonderful actress, dancer, and singer. At the age of sixteen, she auditioned to perform at
Disneyland (something she knew would fulfill her value of accomplishment if she succeeded).
Incredibly, she beat out 700 other girls to win a part in the fabled amusement park's Electric Light
Parade. Initially, Jolie was ecstatic. We, along with her friends, were all so delighted and proud of her,
and we would frequently drive up on weekends to see her perform. Her schedule, however, was
extremely taxing. Jolie had to perform every weeknight as well as weekends, and her school term
wasn't over for the summer yet. So she had to drive from San Diego to Orange County every evening
in rush-hour traffic, rehearse and perform for several hours, then drive back home in the wee hours of
the night so she could get up again early the next morning in time for school. As you can imagine, the
daily commute and long hours soon turned the experience into a grueling120 ordeal121, not to mention
the extremely heavy costume she had to wear which hurt her back.
Even worse, however, from Jolie's perspective, was the fact that her demanding schedule cut
drastically into her personal life and prevented her from spending any time with our family and her
friends. I began to notice her wandering about in a series of very unresourceful emotional states. She
would cry at the drop of a hat, and began to complain about things on a consistent basis. This was
totally unlike Jolie. The final straw was that the whole family was preparing to go to Hawaii for our
three- week Certification program—everyone except Jolie, who had to stay home in order to continue
to work at Disneyland.
One morning, she hit threshold and came to me in tears, undecided and confused. She felt so
frustrated, so unhappy and unfulfilled, yet she had achieved what seemed like an unbelievable goal
only six months earlier. Disneyland had become painful for her. Why? Because it became an obstacle
to her ability to spend time with all those she loved most. Plus Jolie always had felt that the time she
spent at Certification, where she participated as a trainer, helped her to grow more than virtually
anything else in her life. Many of her friends from around the country attended this program each year,
and Disneyland was beginning to feel frustrating to her because she really didn't feel like she was
expanding or growing there at all. She was feeling pain if she decided to come with us to Certification
(because she didn't want to be a quitter) and pain if she continued to work at Disneyland because it
would mean she'd miss out on the things that seemed so important to her.
We sat down together so that I could help her take a close look at what her top four values are in life.
They turned out to be: 1) love, 2) health and vibrancy122, 3) growth, and 4) accomplishment. By
turning to her values, I knew that I could help her get the clarity she needed to make the decision that
would be right for her. So I asked her, "What does working at Disneyland give you? What's important
about working at Disneyland?" She told me that she was originally excited about it because she saw it
as an opportunity to make new friends, receive recognition for her work, have fun, and experience a
tremendous sense of accomplishment.
At this point, though, she said she wasn't feeling very much accomplishment at all because she didn't
feel like she was growing anymore, and she knew there were other things she could be doing that

120

gruel Haferschleim

121

ordeal Qual, Tortur
vibrant kräftig (Farben, Stimme und so weiter); pulsierend (Leben)

122
would accelerate her career more rapidly. She also said, "I'm burning myself into the ground. I'm not
healthy, and I miss being with the family tremendously."
Then I asked her, "What would making a change in this area of your life mean? If you left Disneyland,
spent time at home, and then went to Hawaii, what would that give you?" She immediately brightened.
Smiling, she said, "Well, I'd get to be with you guys. I could have some time with my boyfriend. I'd
feel free again. I could get some rest and start exercising to get my body back in shape. I'd keep my
4.0 grade point average in school. I could find other ways to grow and achieve. I'd be happy!"
Her answer as to what to do was plainly in front of her. The source of her unhappiness was also clear.
Before she started working at Disneyland, she was fulfilling her top three values: she felt loved, she
was very healthy and fit^ and she felt like she was growing. Thus she began to pursue the next value
on her list: accomplishment. But in so doing, she'd created an environment where she achieved, but
missed out on her top three values.
This is such a common experience. We all need to realize that we must accomplish our highest values
first—these are our utmost priority. And remember, there is always a way to accomplish all our values
simultaneously, and we need to make certain we don't settle for anything less.
There still was one final obstacle to Jolie's decision: she also linked pain to leaving Disneyland. One of
the things she avoided most in life was quitting. I certainly had contributed to this view, since I believe
nothing is ever achieved by those who give up whenever it gets tough. So she saw leaving her work at
Disneyland as giving up. I assured her that making a decision to live congruently with your values is
not quitting, nor is foolish consistency a virtue. I would be the first person to ensure that she continue
if I thought she was just giving up because the work was too tough. But that was not the case, and I
offered her the opportunity to turn this transition into a gift for someone else.
I said, "Jolie, can you imagine how you'd feel if you were the first runner-up, and all of a sudden the
winner stepped down, and now you had a chance to be in the parade? Why don't you give that gift to
someone else?" Because part of Jolie's definition of love is contribution, this immediately tapped into
her highest value. She stopped linking pain to quitting, and now associated pleasure to her decision.
This values lesson is one she's never forgotten, and the most exciting thing was that she found a new
way to meet all of her values that began to move her more precisely in the direction of her goals. She
not only began to feel more fun and happiness, but shortly thereafter she got her first job in a San
Diego Starlight Theater production.

LESSONS IN PAIN
Just as there are emotions we desire to experience because they're pleasurable, and that's why we're
always moving toward them, we also have a list of emotions that we'll do almost anything to move
away from. Very early in my career, when I was just beginning to build my first company, I
experienced tremendous frustration in being on the road and trying to run my business simultaneously.
At one point, it appeared that a person representing me had not been completely honest. When you
deal, as I have, with hundreds of thousands of people, and literally thousands of business
arrangements, the law of averages says that a few will attempt to take advantage of you.
Unfortunately, these are the ones that tend to stick out in our minds rather than the hundreds or even
thousands of business relationships that have far surpassed our expectations. As a result of one such
painful situation, I sought out a new CEO, a man who I thought could really run my company. Armed
with my new tool of being able to elicit someone's values, I asked each of the potential candidates,
"What's most important to you in your life?" Some of them said things like "success" or
"accomplishment" or "being the best." But one man used the magic word. He said, "Honesty." I didn't
just take him at his word; I checked him out with several people he'd worked with. They confirmed
that he was "honest as the day was long" and that, in fact, at times he had set aside his own needs if
there was any question of integrity. I thought, "This is the kind of man I want representing me." And
he did a fine job. Soon, though, it became clear that we needed an additional associate in order to
really run my rapidly expanding business: someone who had additional skills. My CEO recommended
someone he thought could become his partner, and they could jointly run my organization. This
sounded great to me. I met this man, whom I'll call Mr. Smith (names have been changed to protect
the not so innocent), and he did a fabulous presentation, demonstrating for me how he could use all
the skills he'd developed throughout the years to take my company to the next level. He could free up
my time, and allow me to do even larger seminars and impact even more people without having to live
on the road. At the time, I was spending almost 150 days a year away from home, conducting my
seminars. In addition, he didn't want to be paid until he'd produced the result! It sounded almost too
good to be true. I agreed to the arrangement. Mr. Smith and my honest CEO would run my company.
A year and a half later, I woke up and discovered that it was too good to be true. Yes, my seminars
had gotten bigger, but now I was on the road almost 270 days a year. My skill and impact had grown,
I'd helped more people than ever before, but suddenly I was informed that I was $758,000 in debt
after I'd given more than I ever had in my entire lifetime. How could this possibly be? Well,
management is everything, both within companies and within ourselves. And I clearly did not have the
right managers.
But worse, Mr. Smith had over this eighteen-month period of time misappropriated123 more than a
quarter of a million dollars from our coffers. He had a new house, a new car—I had assumed he'd
gotten them from his other businesses. Boy, was I in for a surprise! To say that I was angry or
devastated124 by this experience would certainly be using Transformational Vocabulary to lower the
intensity of my feelings. The metaphors I used at the time were things like "I feel stabbed in the back"
and "He tried to murder my firstborn." How's that for emotional intensity?
However, the thing that perplexed me the most was how my honest CEO could stand by and not warn
me that all this was happening. He was aware of what was going on! This was when I began to realize
that people don't just pursue pleasure, but they clearly also move away from pain. My honest CEO had
tried to tell me that he was concerned about his partner. He came to me after I'd been on the road for
three straight months. On my first day home, he approached me to tell me that he had questions
about Mr. Smith's integrity. I immediately became concerned and asked him why. He said, "When we

123
124

misappropriate unterschlagen, veruntreuen
devastate verwüsten
moved to our new offices, he took the biggest office." This was so petty125 that I got extremely angry
and said, "Listen. You brought him into this business; you deal with him yourself personally." And I
stormed off.
I should have realized that day that I'd given this man pain when he was trying to give me information.
In my exhausted and stressed state I failed to evaluate the deeper meaning of what was going on. As
if this weren't bad enough, my honest CEO approached me again to give me similar feedback. I told
him that he was not being totally honest by talking to me instead of Mr. Smith. I marched into his
associate's office and said, "He's telling me all these things about you. You guys work this out!" Can
you imagine the pain he got from Mr. Smith? As I look back on the experience now, I can see clearly
why he didn't tell me the truth. Telling me the truth—that he'd brought someone intomy business
who'd misappropriate more than a quarter of a million dollars—seemed to him, in the short term, to be
much more painful than just putting it off and trying to find some other way to deal with it eventually.
In fact, as I look back on all the upsets I ever had with this CEO, invariably they all came down to
times when he didn't do things he needed to do simply because he wanted to avoid the feeling of
confrontation. This was the ultimate pain for him, So while honesty was important to him, avoiding
confrontation was more important. Thus he simply did not communicate to me, and rationalized that
he was being honest because, after all, I had never asked him if Mr. Smith was taking money. If I had,
he would have told me. As angry as this situation made me, and as painful as it was financially and
emotionally, it provided me with one of the most valuable lessons of my life because it gave me one of
the final pieces in the puzzle of understanding human behavior. Understanding these twin forces of
pain and pleasure has helped me not only to positively influence myself and my family, but people
around the world with greater precision.

MOVING-AWAY-FROM VALUES
We must remember, then, that any time we make a decision about what to do, our brain first
evaluates whether that action can possibly lead to either pleasurable or painful states. Your brain is
constantly juggling126, or weighing, your alternatives to see what the impact may be, based upon your
value hierarchy. If, for example, I asked you to go skydiving, and the number-one emotion you try to
avoid at all costs is a sense of fear, it's pretty obvious that you're not going to take action, are you? If,
however, the number-one value you want to avoid at all costs is a feeling of rejection, and you believe
that I may reject you if you don't go, you may decide to jump out of a plane in spite of your fear. The
relative levels of pain we associate with certain emotions will affect all of our decisions.
What are some of the emotions that are most important for you to avoid experiencing on a consistent
basis? Often when I ask people this question at seminars, they come up with a list such as the
following:
Rejection

125
126

petty (-ier, -iest) belanglos, unbedeutend, (Vergehen auch) geringfügig; engstirnig
juggle jonglieren (mit); Bücher und so weiter frisieren
Anger
Frustration
Loneliness
Depression
Failure
Humiliation
Guilt
Again, would it be fair to say that all these emotions are states you'd like to avoid having to feel? Of
course, because they're painful. Wouldn't it also be true to say that, while you want to avoid feeling all
of these emotions, some are more painful to you than others? That, in fact, you have a hierarchy of
moving-away-from values as well? Which value on the above list would you do the most to avoid
having to feel? Rejection, depression, humiliation? The answer to this question will determine your
behavior in almost any environment.
Take a moment before we go any further, and write this list out in the above blanks, ranking them
from the emotional states you'll do the most to avoid having to feel, to those you'll do the least to
avoid having to feel.
"I hope we can build a university our football team can be proud of."
UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA
As you look at your list, what does it tell you? If, for example, you put at the top of your list that the
emotion you would do the most to avoid having to feel is humiliation, then can you see how you would
consistently avoid entering any situations where you might be judged harshly?
If loneliness is the emotion you want to avoid most, it may drive you to be a nurturing person,
reaching out to others and trying to give to them on a regular basis so that they'll want to be with you,
and so that you'll be surrounded by many grateful friends.

THE SOURCE OF SELF-SABOTAGE: VALUES CONFLICTS
Now let's look at the dynamics created by your values hierarchy. If you selected success, for example,
as your top moving-toward value, and rejection as your top moving-away-from value, do you see any
possible challenges that this hierarchy might create in your life? I'm here to tell you that a person
who's trying to achieve the pleasure of success without ever experiencing the pain of rejection will
never succeed long term. In fact, this person will sabotage himself before he ever truly succeeds on a
major scale. How can I make such a claim? Remember the basic organizing principle we've talked
about so often here: People will do more to avoid pain than they will to gain pleasure. If you're truly
going to succeed at the highest level in life, don't you have to be willing to risk rejection?
Don't you have to be willing to experience it? Isn't it true that even if you're an honest and sincere
person and give your all to others every day, there are still people who will misinterpret your actions
and judge you without even having met you? Whether you want to be a writer, a singer, a speaker, or
a business person, the potential for rejection is ever-present. Since your brain inherently knows that
in order to succeed you have to risk rejection, and it's already decided that the feelings of rejection are
the ultimate levels of pain, it will make the decision that the pleasure of success is not worth the price,
and will cause you to sabotage your behavior before you even get in this position!
So often I see people who take huge strides forward, only to mysteriously pull back at the last minute.
Or they'll say or do things that sabotage the very personal, emotional, or physical success they're
pursuing. Invariably the reason is that they have a major values conflict. Part of their brain is saying,
"Go for it!" while the other pan is saying "If you do you're going to get too much pain." So they take
two steps forward and one step back.
During the 1988 election year, I used to call this principle the "Gary Hart Syndrome." Here was a nice
guy who truly seemed to care passionately about people and society, but whose value conflicts were
played out for all to see. Was Gary Hart a horrible guy? I doubt it. He was just someone who had
values in massive conflict. He grew up in a church that taught him he was committing a sin127 if he
even danced. Simultaneously he was exposed to role models like Warren Beatty. These conflicting
desires obviously played a role in his political downfall Do you think that a person as intelligent as Gary
Hart clearly seemed to be would tell the media, "If you've got questions about me, follow me" and
then immediately afterward go visit his mistress? Clearly this was his brain s way of getting out of the
pain of being in a position where he had to play by rules other than his own. You can call this pop
psychology if you want but doesn't it make sense that if you are being pulled in two different directions,
you will not be able to serve both masters? Something has to give. We'll do whatever's necessary,
consciously or unconsciously to keep ourselves from having to experience our most intense
levels of pain.
We've all seen people in the public eye who've experienced the pain of values conflicts, but rather than
be judgmental, we need to realize that each of us has values conflicts within ourselves. Why? Again
simply because we never set the system up for ourselves. We've allowed our environment to shape us,
but we can begin to change this now.
How? Simply by taking two steps:
Step One is to gain awareness of what your current values are so you understand why you do what
you do. What are the emotional states you are moving toward, and what are the states you are
moving away from? By reviewing your lists side by side, you'll be able to have an understanding of
the force that's creating your present and future.
Step Two: You can then make conscious decisions about what values you want to live by in order to
shape the quality of life and destiny you truly desire and deserve.

HOW TO DISCOVER YOUR CURRENT VALUES

127

sin 1. Sünde; 2. (-nn-) sündigen
So let's get started. You've done some sample value lists by ranking the lists I gave you. What you
really need to do is start fresh with your own lists. All you have to do to discover your values is answer
one simple question:. "What's most important to me in life?" Brainstorm the answer to this question.
Is it peace of mind? Impact? Love? Now put your values in order, from most important to least
important. Take a moment and do this now . . .

WHAT'S MOST IMPORTANT TO ME IN LIFE:
When I first created my list of moving-toward values, this is what I came up with, and the order in
which they occurred:
MY OLD LIST OF MOVING-TOWARD VALUES
Passion
Love
Freedom
Contribution
Being Able
Growth
Achievement / Accomplishment
Happiness
Fun
Health
Creativity
As I looked at my list, I understood why I was doing what I was doing. I was such an intense individual;
by anybody's description I was explosive in my approach. I saw it as my passion. My love for my
family and my friends and wanting to share it in seminars was clear. My desire was to free people, and
I figured that if I freed the individuals around me and contributed to them, I'd feel like I was able to do
almost anything.
I'd grow and achieve and eventually have fun and be healthy and creative. Knowing my values list
helped me stay on track and to live consistently with what was most important to me. For years, I felt
a greater sense of congruency in my life.
But I was soon to make another distinction that would transform the quality of my life forever.

CHANGE YOUR VALUES, AND YOU CHANGE YOUR LIFE
After my experience with the infamous128 Mr. Smith, I went to Fiji to get away from it all. I needed to
balance myself emotionally, and gain some perspective and clarity on the situation. Most importantly, I
had to decide what I was going to do and how I was going to turn things around. The first night I was
there, before I went to sleep, I asked myself a very important question. Instead of "Why did all this
happen to me?", I began to ask a better question: "What is the source of all human behavior? What
makes people do what they do?"
When I woke up the following morning at 8 a.m., I felt a frenzy129 of ideas pouring130 through me. I
grabbed my journal and began to write continuously, sitting in the main cabana. People walked in and
out throughout the day as I wrote nonstop from 8 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. My arm was sore131; my fingers
were numb132. I wasn't just thinking calmly and writing; the ideas were literally exploding through me.
From this unstoppable river of ideas, I designed Destiny Technologies™ and a good portion of the
science of Neuro-Associative Conditioning.™ When I went back to review my notes, however, I couldn't
read a word! But the ideas and feelings were anchored within me. I immediately realized the potency
of what I had created: a program that could help a person redesign the life priorities of their nervous
system, to literally redirect the process of how people make all their decisions about how to think, how
to feel, and what to do in virtually every area of their lives!
I began to think about what would happen it, instead of just teaching people what their values were
and clarifying them, I actually got people to consciously select or redirect the order and content of
their values hierarchy system. What if I took someone whose number-one value was security, and
whose number-fifteen value was adventure, and I switched the order, not only intellectually but so
that adventure became the new highest priority in their nervous system? What kind of change do you
think that might make in someone's life? A minor one, or a major one?
The answer is obvious. By doing this, you literally change the way a person thinks, feels, and behaves
in virtually every area of their life. I couldn't imagine a more profound shift that a human being could
make. In essence, this would be the kind of change that has been described throughout history: a
conversion from Saul to Paul, if you will, with the things that a person hated most becoming the things
they loved most, and vice versa.
Could this really be done? I decided that the best person to test this out on was, of course, myself. I
began to look at my values list. At first I thought, "My values are great! I love my values. After all, this
is who I am." But I had to keep reminding myself that we are not our values. We are much more than
our values. These values were not the result of intelligent choices and a master plan. What I had
merely accomplished until now was discovering what priorities were conditioned into my life, and I had
consciously chosen to live within the system of pain and pleasure that had been programmed into me.
But if I were to really design my own life, if I were going to create a set of values that would shape the
ultimate destiny 1 desired, what would they need to be?
128

infamous berüchtigt; schändlich, niederträchtig
frenzy helle Aufregung; Ekstase; Raserei
130
pour gießen, schütten; pour out ausgießen, -schütten; Getränk eingießen; strömen (auch übertragen)
131
sore 1. (sorer, sorest) weh, wund; entzündet; übertragen wund (Punkt); besonders Am. umgangssprachlich:
übertragen sauer; I'm sore all over mir tut alles weh; sore throat Halsentzündung weiblich; have a sore throat
auch Halsschmerzen haben; 2. wunde Stelle, Wunde
132
numb 1. starr (with vor Kälte und so weiter), taub; übertragen wie betäubt (with vor Schmerz und so weiter);
2. starr oder taub machen
129
"We have made thee neither of heaven nor of earth,
Neither mortal nor immortal,
So that with freedom of choice and with honor,
As though the maker and molder of thyself,
Thou mayest fashion thyself in whatever shape thou shalt prefer.
Thou shalt have the power out of thy soul's judgment,
To be reborn into the higher forms, which are divine."
GOD'S SPEECH TO ADAM FROM PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA'S ORATION ON THE DIGNITY OF MAN
I felt unbelievably inspired as I began to realize that in this moment I was about to make decisions
that would change the direction of my life forever. I began to look at my values and ask the question,
"What do my values need to be in order to create my ultimate destiny, in order to be the best person I
could possibly be, in order to have the largest impact in my lifetime?"
I thought, "The values I have right now are helping me," but then I thought, "What other values would
I need to add?" I began to realize that one of the things that wasn't on my list was intelligence.
Certainly I was an intelligent person, but I hadn't made being intelligent as high a priority as being
passionate. In fact, in my passion I'd made some pretty stupid choices—including who my CEO was
going to be!
I began to realize that unless I made intelligence a conscious priority of my nervous system (i.e.,
unless I learned to take a moment or two in advance to consciously evaluate the consequences of my
decision making), I would continuously fail to achieve my deepest desires. There was now no question
that intelligence needed to be placed high on my list. I then discovered an additional series of values
to add, and I decided where they needed to be placed in my hierarchy.
Then I asked a question I had never asked before: "What values should I eliminate from my list in
order to achieve my ultimate destiny?" I began to realize that by constantly focusing on how to be free,
I was missing out on the freedom I already had. I realized that there was no way I could be any more
free than I was in this moment. Maybe my feelings would be different if I lived in a country where the
choices I have here don't exist, but for me, there is no way to have any more freedom than I have
today. So I decided to drop it from my list and not to make it an issue anymore. It was amazing die
freedom I felt by getting freedom off my list!
Next, I began to evaluate each value individually as to its true merit. I began to ask, "What benefit do
I get by having this value in this position on my hierarchy?" I looked first at passion and asked, "What
benefit do I get by having passion here?" I thought, "It gives me drive and excitement and energy and
the power to impact people in positive ways. It makes my life juicy."
Then I asked a question that kind of scared me, a question I had never asked before: "What could
having passion at the top of my list cost me?" In that moment, the answer became obvious. I had just
recently returned from conducting a seminar in Denver, where for the first time in years I had felt
unbelievably ill. Health was always on my values list; it was important. But it wasn't very high up on
the list.
By the way, it you have anything on your values list, you think it's important, because there are
hundreds of things that could have been on the list that aren't. But my idea of health was to eat right.
I wasn't exercising, and I certainly wasn't getting enough rest. Finally, my body was giving out under
my constant demands for unlimited energy. I began to remember that in that day, when I felt like I
had no health, I pushed myself and did the seminars in spite of it all. But I didn't feel passionate,
I didn't feel loving, I didn't feel like 1 could have impact. I began to realize that by having passion as
the highest value on my list, it would cause me to burn out and therefore potentially cost me the very
destiny I was pursuing.
I finally asked the last question: "In what order do my values need to be to achieve my ultimate
destiny?" Not "What's important to me?" but "What do they need to be?" As I began to do this process,
my list began to evolve until it looked like this:
MY NEW LIST OF MOVING-TOWARD VALUES
Health/Vitality
Love/Warmth
Intelligence
Cheerfulness
Honesty
Passion
Gratefulness
Fun/Happiness
Making a difference
Learning/Growing
Achieving
Being the best
Investing
Contribution
Creativity
These shifts may look subtle to you, but they were profound in their emotional impact upon me. Just
creating this new list of life priorities created some intense fear and struggle at times. Probably the
most difficult one was changing the order that I had between achievement and happiness. If you recall,
on my previous list I had to feel passion, love, freedom, contribution, being able, growth, and
achievement, and a lower priority was feeling happy. I began to think, "What would happen if I made
happiness a priority? What would happen if I made that a higher priority than achieving?"
Quite honestly, this was another question that created fear in me. I thought, "If it's easy for me to feel
happy, maybe I'll lose my drive. Maybe I won't want to achieve. Maybe I won't want to have the same
impact. Maybe I won't contribute as much to people." After all, I linked my identity to my capacity to
passionately make a difference. It took me almost two hours to make the decision to "go for the gusto"
and decide to make myself happy. How ridiculous! But I can tell you, having worked with tens of
thousands of people in Date With Destiny, of whom the majority of attendees would be considered
achievers, this is one of the biggest fears they have. They generally fear that they'll lose their power or
drive if they feel happy first. I'm here to tell you that what happened in my life is that instead of
achieving to be happy, I began to happily achieve, and the difference in the quality of my life is so
profound that it is beyond verbal description. I didn't lose my drive—quite conversely, I felt so good, I
wanted to do even more!
When my list was complete, I felt an emotion that I could not ever remember feeling previously: a
sense of calm. I felt a sense of certainty I hadn't experienced before, because I now knew that every
part of me was going to be pulled in the direction of my dreams. I was no longer in a tug-of-war with
myself. By no longer striving constantly for freedom, I could have even more intimacy and love—I
could feel even more free. I would happily achieve now. I would be healthy and vital and intelligent.
With the decision to change my life's priorities, I could immediately feel the changes in my physical
body.
I also then began to realize that there were certain emotional states that I must avoid indulging in if I
was going to succeed. One of those clearly was worry. I found myself emotionally and physically
racked133 by the pain of trying to figure out how I was going to keep my company going and keep the
doors open. At the time, I believed that if I worried, maybe I'd be more motivated, but what I found
was that worry made me less resourceful. So I decided I couldn't worry anymore. I could have
legitimate concern, but more importantly, I could focus on taking the actions that would make things
work. Once I decided worry would destroy my destiny, I began to avoid experiencing it at all costs.
Clearly, this became an emotion too painful to indulge in. I began to construct a moving-away-from
list.
I then flew back to the United States, having designed my own destiny. Boy, were my friends and
associates in for a surprise! On my first day back at the office, people started approaching me to ask,
"What's happened to you? You seem so different! You look so relaxed." I began to unload my entire
new technology for hours at a time on each individual until finally I realized I needed to take it, refine
it, and put it in a seminar. That's how Date With Destiny was born. I wrote this book out of my desire
to spread the Destiny-NAC technology to as many people as possible. I hope you'll use it now.
Remember, we truly can design who we become.
"Give me beauty in the inward soul; may the outward and the inward man be at one."
SOCRATES
So how can you now take control of this third element of your Master System known as values? Take
the following two simple steps:
Step 1. Find out what your current values are, and rank them in order of importance. This will
give you insight into what you want to experience most—your moving-toward values—and what you
want to avoid most in your life—your moving-away-from values. It will give you an understanding of
133
rack 1. Gestell, (Geschirr-, Zeitungs- und so weiter)Ständer, EISENBAHN (Gepäck)Netz, KRAFTFAHRWESEN
(Dach)Gepäckträger; GESCHICHTE Folter(bank); 2. be racked by oder with geplagt oder gequält werden von;
rack one's brains sich das Hirn zermartern, sich den Kopf zerbrechen
why you do what you do. It will also offer you the opportunity, if you'd like, to consistently experience
more pleasure in your life by understanding the pain-pleasure system that's already built within you.
Step 2. If you're willing to take the bull by the horns, you have an opportunity to redirect your destiny.
Ask yourself a new question: "What do my values need to be in order to achieve the destiny I
desire and deserve?" Brainstorm out a list. Put them in order. See which values you might
get rid of and which values you might add in order to create the quality of life you truly
want.
You may be wondering, "What the heck is my destiny, anyway?" If you're stumbling over this, go back
to Chapter 12. In it, I asked you what type of person you'd have to be in order to achieve all that you
want. In order to be that person, what would your values need to be? What values
would you need to add or eliminate?
For example, how would your capacity to deal with fear, frustration, and rejection be affected by
deciding to place courage high upon your moving-toward value list? Or, what might be the impact of
giving playfulness a higher priority? Might it enable you to have more fun in life, possibly enjoy all
experiences as they come, grow closer to your children and be more to them than just a "provider"?
So what have you accomplished by creating your new list of values? Isn't it just a bunch of words on a
piece of paper? The answer is yes—if you don't condition yourself to use them as your new compass. If
you do, however, they become the solid foundation of every decision you will make. It is difficult to
give you in this book the full range of conditioning tools that I use in seminars, but let me remind you
of the power of leverage. Many people who have attended Date With Destiny post their values
prominently at work, at home, anywhere they will be seen by people who will hold them to this new,
higher standard.
So use the same kind of leverage to strengthen your commitment to your new values. The next time
you find yourself yelling at the kids, maybe someone who loves you will walk by and remind you, "Isn't
compassion number one on your list?"
"I touch the future; I teach."
ANONYMOUS
Watching people take control of their value hierarchies in Date With Destiny is so rewarding because of
the huge contrast between what they're like Friday morning and who they become by Sunday night. As
transformations occur, magic happens. I remember one man who was dragged by his wife to the
program and didn't want to be there. As we started talking about values and the possibility of making
changes in that area, he insisted, "I don't need to change any of my values." His number-one value,
by the way, was freedom! He balked134 at being "forced" to change anything in his life that he didn't
want to; it became a control issue as he steadfastly refused to make any changes.
Finally I said to him, "I know you don't have to make any changes. I also know that you're free. So I'm
sure you're free to add a few values. What would be some values that might be useful for you to add
in order for you to increase the quality of your life and maybe even impact your ultimate destiny?"
134

balk 1. Balken; 2. stutzen; scheuen
After several moments of thought he said, "Well, maybe flexibility might be a good one to add." The
audience cracked up. "That's great," I said. "Where would you put flexibility on your list?" We started
from the bottom and moved up, and it ended up being number four on his list.
The moment this man decided that was indeed the right place for his new value, another participant—a
chiropractor—who was sitting behind him suddenly piped up, "Did you see that?" It was so obvious
that several other people in the room had also noticed it. This man's physiology had literally begun to
change before our eyes. As he had adopted flexibility in his value system, his whole posture seemed to
loosen up and become more relaxed. He sat in his chair differently, and seemed to be breathing with a
lot more freedom. Even his expression changed as the muscles in his face released their tension. With
flexibility as a new priority, his nervous system had obviously gotten the message.
Then I asked, "Are there any other values you might want to add to your list?" The man thought a
moment and said, "Maybe .. . forgiveness?" with a question in his voice. Again the group broke up
laughing. This was a man who had started out bristling135 with hostility and tension, and here he was,
making a 180-degree shift. As he figured out where to put forgiveness into his values hierarchy, it was
gratifying to see the further changes that took place in his demeanor, breathing, facial muscles, and
gestures. Throughout the rest of the weekend people were amazed by the dramatic changes that had
been wrought with two simple additions to his values. He talked to people with more softness in his
voice, his face seemed to "open up" with more expression, and he really seemed to connect with
people in ways he hadn't before. Now, three years later, freedom is not even on his list, and the
intimacy between his wife and him has expanded immeasurably.
"We are what we repeatedly do."
ARISTOTLE
Life has a way of testing our commitment to our values. My test came as I was boarding an
airplane . . . and lo and behold, there stood the illustrious136 Mr. Smith. I felt the anger and animosity
well up inside me with an intensity I hadn't experienced for over two years, primarily because I hadn't
seen him. He scurried137 onto the plane and seated himself in the rear. As I sat in my seat, knowing he
was behind me, questions raced through my head: What should I do? Should I confront him? Should I
just walk up next to him, stand there and stare at him, and make him squirm138? I'm not proud of
these questions, but since honesty is one of my highest values, I'm giving it to you straight.
In a moment, though, my actions were guided by my values. Why? I opened my notebook to write
something down, and there were my values hierarchies, placed at the front of my book. At the top it
said, "What's most important to me in life is to be loving and warm." Hmmmm. "Be intelligent."
Hmmmm. "Be cheerful. Be honest. Be passionate. Be grateful. Have fun. Make a difference ..." Well,
as you can imagine, my state changed pretty radically. Obviously my pattern had been broken. A

135
136
137
138

bristle 1. Borste; (Bart)Stoppel; 2. auch bristle up sich sträuben; zornig werden; strotzen, wimmeln (with von)
illustrious berühmt
scurry huschen; trippeln
squirm sich winden
reminder of who I really am and what I'm really about was staring me in the face. What to do became
obvious.
When the plane landed, I approached him with sincerity and warmth and told him that while by no
means did I appreciate or approve of his past behavior, I had decided to no longer hold a ferocious
level of resentment toward him, and that I actually wished him well. The last memory I have was his
stunned face as I turned and walked away. Wow! What an emotional hit! Even in a stressful
environment, I'd lived by what I believed was right. Nothing in life can match the fulfillment of
knowing you've done what you truly believe is the right thing.
Give yourself the gift of taking hold of this force that shapes your destiny. Make certain that you take
the time to do the exercises that can clarify the priorities of your life.
Is it possible to have values and not feel that you're living them? You can have a great system of
values that gives your life a magnificent direction but still feel unhappy, unless you understand the
power of...
16
RULES: IF YOU'RE NOT HAPPY, HERE'S WHY!

"Hold yourself responsible for a higher standard than anybody else expects of you."
HENRY WARD BEECHER

As I write these words, I'm looking out over the deep blue Pacific from my room at the Hyatt Regency
Waikoloa resort on the Big Island of Hawaii. I've just observed something that won't happen in North
America again until the year 2017: a total eclipse of the sun. Becky and I got up this morning at 5:30
a.m. so that we, along with thousands of other visitors, could witness this rare astronomical event.
As crowds of people gathered at the viewing site, I began to entertain myself by watching the diversity
of people who had come to share this occasion: everyone from top businessmen to vacationing
families, from scientists lugging dozens of telescopes to hikers who'd pitched their tents in the lava pits
overnight, and little children who knew this was an exciting event only because their parents had told
them so. Here were hordes of people who had flown in from all over the world, at a cost of thousands
of dollars, just for the chance to see something that would take about four minutes! What were we
doing here? We wanted to stand in a shadow! We're an interesting species, aren't we?
By 6:28 a.m., the drama had begun to unfold. There was anxiety in the air, not just the anticipation of
seeing the eclipse, but the fear of disappointment. For on this unique morning, the clouds had begun
to gather, and the sky was becoming overcast. It was interesting to see how people were dealing with
the possibility that their expectations would not be met. What they had come to see was not merely a
brief flitting139 of the moon over the sun, but a four-minute total eclipse—when the shadow of
the moon would completely block the sun's rays and envelop us in darkness. They even had a name
for it: totality!
By 7:10 a.m., the clouds had increased and were getting larger by the minute. Suddenly, the sun
broke through a hole in the clouds, and for a moment we could all see a partial eclipse. The crowd
greeted it with excited applause, but soon the clouds rolled back in, thicker and thicker, completely
obscuring our view. Nearing the moment of totality—utter darkness—it became obvious that we
wouldn't be able to watch the moon overtake the sun.
Suddenly, thousands of people began to run over to a big-screen television set that one of the many
TV crews had erected. There we sat, watching the eclipse on national television, just like everyone else
in the world! In those moments I had a chance to observe an unlimited range of human emotion. Each
person responded according to their rules: their beliefs about what had to happen in order for them to
feel good about this experience.

139

flit (-tt-) flitzen, huschen
One man behind me started cursing, saying, "I spent $4,000 and traveled all this way, just so I could
watch this for four minutes on television?" A woman only a few feet away kept saying, "I can't believe
we missed it!" while her bright little daughter enthusiastically reminded her, "But, Mom, it's happening
right now!" Another woman sitting just to my right said, "Isn't this incredible? I feel so lucky to be
here!"
Then a dramatic thing happened. As we observed on TV the last sliver of sunlight disappear behind the
moon, in that instant we were engulfed in darkness. It was completely unlike nightfall, when the sky
darkens gradually. This was immediate and total darkness! Initially there was a roar through the crowd,
but then a hush140 fell upon us. The birds flew into the trees and became silent. It was a truly amazing
moment. Then something hysterical happened. As people sat in the dark, staring at the eclipse on the
television screen, some of those who had brought their cameras and were determined to get their
outcome began taking pictures of the screen. In a moment, we were flooded with light again—not
because of the sun—but because of all the flash bulbs!
Almost as soon as it had begun, though, totality was over. The most dramatic moment of the whole
event for me was the instant that a thin sliver of the sun slipped out from behind the moon, instantly
bringing full daylight with it. It occurred to me then that it doesn't take very much light to wipe out the
darkness.
Within moments of the return of sunlight, a large number of people got up and began to leave. I was
puzzled. After all, the eclipse was still happening. Most of them were muttering141 complaints about
how they'd "come all this way and missed out on the experience of a lifetime." A few enraptured142
souls, however, lingered143 to watch every minute, feeling great excitement and joy. The most ironic
thing of all was that within fifteen to twenty minutes, the trade winds had cleared all the clouds from
the sky.
It was now blue and clear, and the eclipse was revealed144 for everyone to see. But few people had
remained; most had already returned to their rooms disgruntled. They continued to give themselves
the sensations of pain because their expectations had not been met.
As I usually do, I started interviewing people. I wanted to find out what their experience of the eclipse
had been. Many people talked about how it was the most incredible, spiritual experience of their lives.
One pregnant woman rubbed her swollen tummy and shared with me that the eclipse somehow had
created a feeling of stronger connection with her unborn child, and that this was just the right place on
earth for her to be. What a contrast of beliefs and rules I noticed today!
What struck me as most humorous, though, was that people would get so excited and emotional about
something like this, which was merely a four-minute shadow. If you really think about it, it's no more
of a miracle than the sun coming up each morning! Can you imagine if every morning people from all
over the world got up early so they could watch the sun come up? What it national and international
news ardently covered every phase of the event with in-depth reports, passionately tracking the sun's
rise into the sky, and everybody spent their mornings talking about what a miracle it is? Can you
140
141
142
143

hush 1. Interjektion still!; 2. Stille; 3. zum Schweigen bringen; !! nicht huschen; hush up vertuschen
mutter 1. murmeln; murren; 2. Murmeln; Murren
enraptured entzückt, hingerissen
linger verweilen, sich aufhalten; dahinsiechen; linger on noch dableiben; übertragen fortleben
imagine the kind of days we'd have? What if CNN opened every broadcast with, "Good morning. Once
again, the miracle has happened—the sun has risen!"? Why don't we respond this way? Could we? You
bet we could. But the problem is that we've become habituated. We're so accustomed to the miracles
happening around us every day that we don't even see them as miracles anymore.
For most of us, our rules for what's valuable dictate that we covet things that are scarce, instead of
appreciating the miracles that abound. What determined the differences in these people's responses,
from one man who got so upset he destroyed his camera on the spot, to those who not only
experienced joy today, but would experience it every time they told others about the eclipse in the
coming weeks, months, and years?
Our experience of this reality had nothing to do with reality, but was interpreted through the
controlling force of our beliefs: specifically, the rules we had about what had to happen in order for us
to feel good. I call these specific beliefs that determine when we get pain and when we get pleasure
rules. Failure to understand their power can destroy any possibility for lifelong happiness, and a full
understanding and utilization of them can transform your life as much as anything we've covered in
this entire book.
Let met ask you a question before we go any further. What has to happen in order for you to feel good?
Do you have to have someone hug you, kiss you, make love to you, tell you how much they respect
and appreciate you? Must you make a million dollars? Do you have to hit below-par golf? Do you have
to be acknowledged by your boss? Do you have to achieve all of your goals? Do you have to drive the
right car, go to the right parties, be known by the right people? Do you have to be spiritually evolved
or wait until you achieve total enlightenment? Do you have to run five miles a day? What really has to
happen in order for you to feel good?
The truth is that nothing has to happen in order for you to feel good. You don't need an eclipse to feel
good. You could feel good right now for absolutely no reason whatsoever! Think about it. If you make
a million dollars, the million dollars doesn't give you any pleasure. It's your rule that says, "When I hit
this mark, then I'll give myself permission to feel good." In that moment, when you decide to feel good,
you send a message to your brain to change your responses in the muscles of your face, chest, and
body, to change your breathing, and to change the biochemistry within your nervous system that
causes you to feel the sensations you call pleasure.
Who do you think had the worst time the day of the eclipse? Those with the most intense rules about
what had to happen before they could feel good! There's no doubt that the scientists, and the tourists
who saw themselves as scientists, probably had the most pain. Many of them had huge agendas they
were trying to complete in those four minutes before they could feel good about it.
Don't misunderstand; there's nothing wrong with being committed to accomplishing and doing
everything you can. But years ago, I made a distinction that changed the quality of my life forever: as
long as we structure our lives in a way where our happiness is dependent upon something we cannot
control, then we will experience pain. Since I wasn't willing to live with the fear that pain could shake
me anymore, and I considered myself to be intelligent, I redesigned my rules so that when I feel pain
and when I feel pleasure is whenever I feel it's appropriate based on my capacity to direct my own
144

reveal den Blick freigeben auf (Akkusativ), zeigen; Geheimnis und so weiter enthüllen, aufdecken
mind, body, and emotions. Specifically, Becky and I enjoyed the eclipse immensely. We were in Hawaii
for other reasons anyway (to conduct my three-week Certification program), so coming here a few
days early to watch the eclipse was a bonus for us.
But the real reason we enjoyed ourselves was not that we had low expectations; we were looking
forward to it. The key to our happiness could be found in one key rule we shared: we decided that our
rule for the day was that we were going to enjoy this event no matter what happened. It wasn't that
we didn't have expectations; it was that we decided that no matter what happened, we'd find a way to
enjoy it.
Now, if you adopted and consistently applied this rule to your own life, can you see how that would
change virtually everything you experience? When I tell people about this rule, some of them respond,
"Yeah, but you're just lowering your standards." Nothing could be further from the truth! To adopt this
rule is to raise your standards. It means you'll hold yourself to a higher standard of enjoying yourself
despite the conditions of the moment. It means you've committed to being intelligent enough, flexible
enough, and creative enough to direct your focus and evaluations in a way that allows you to
experience the true richness of life—maybe that's the ultimate rule.
In the last chapter, you began to design for yourself a hierarchy of values to refine and define the
direction of your life. You need to understand that whether or not you feel like you're achieving your
values is totally dependent upon your rules—your beliefs about what has to happen for you to feel
successful or happy or experiencing love.
You can decide to make happiness a priority, but if your rule for happiness is that everything must go
just as you planned, I guarantee you're not going to experience this value on a consistent basis. Life is
a variable event, so our rules must be organized in ways that allow us to adapt, grow, and enjoy. It's
critical for us to understand these unconscious beliefs that control when we give ourselves pain and
when we give ourselves pleasure.

JUDGE AND JURY
We all have different rules and standards that govern not only the way we feel about the things that
happen in our lives, but how we'll behave and respond to a given situation. Ultimately what we do and
who we become is dependent upon the direction that our values have taken us. But equally, or
possibly even more importantly, what will determine our emotions and behaviors is our beliefs about
what is good and what is bad, what we should do and what we must do. These precise standards and
criteria are what I've labeled rules.
Rules are the trigger for any pain or pleasure you feel in your nervous system at any moment. It's as if
we have a miniature court system set up within our brains. Our personal rules are the ultimate judge
and jury. They determine whether or not a certain value is met, whether we'll feel good or bad,
whether we'll give ourselves pain or pleasure. If I were to ask you, for example, "Do you have a great
body?," how would you respond? It would depend on whether you think you meet a certain set of
criteria that you believe constitutes having a great body.
Here's another question: "Are you a great lover?" Your answer will be based upon your rules of what's
required to be a great lover, the standards to which you hold yourself. If you told me, "Yes, I'm a great
lover," I'd discover your rules by asking the key question, "How do you know you're a great lover?
What has to happen in order for you to feel you're a great lover?"
You might say something like, "I know I'm a great lover because when I make love with a person, they
usually say that it feels great." Others might say, "I know I'm a great lover because my lover tells me
so."
Or "I know I'm a great lover because of the responses I get from my partner." Others might say, "I
know I'm a great lover because I feel good when I'm making love." (Doesn't their partner's response
matter at all? Hmmm.) Or your answer might just be, "Ask around!" On the other hand, some people
don't feel that they're great lovers.
Is this because they aren't great lovers? Or is it because their rules are inappropriate? This is an
important question to answer. In many cases, people won't feel that they're a great lover because
their partner doesn't tell them that they're a great lover. Their partner may respond passionately, but
because they don't meet the specific rule of this individual, the person is certain they're not a great
lover.
This predicament of not feeling the emotions we deserve is not limited to relationships or lovemaking.
Most of us have rules that are just as inappropriate for defining success, making a difference, security,
intelligence, or anything else. Everything in our lives, from work to play, is presided over by this
judge-and-jury system.
The point here is simple: our rules are controlling our responses every moment we're alive. And, of
course, as you've already guessed, they have been set up in a totally arbitrary fashion. Like so many
other elements of the Master System that directs our lives, our rules have resulted from a dizzying
collage of influences to which we've been exposed. The same punishment and reward system that
shapes our values shapes our rules. In fact, as we develop new values, we also develop beliefs about
what it will take to have those values met, so rules are added continuously. And, with the addition of
more rules, we often tend to distort, generalize, and delete our past rules. We develop rules in conflict.
For some people, rules are formed out of their desire to rebel against rules they grew up with.
Are the rules that guide your life today still appropriate for who you've become? Or have you clung to
rules that helped you in the past, but hurt you in the present? Have you clung to any inappropriate
rules from your childhood?
"Any fool can make a rule—And every fool will mind it."
HENRY DAVID THOREAU
Rules are a shortcut for our brains. They help us to have a sense of certainty about the consequences
of our actions; thus, they enable us to make lightning-quick decisions as to what things mean and
what we should do about them. When someone smiles at you, if you had to engage in a long,
tedious145
145

tedious langweilig, ermüdend
set of calculations in order to figure out what that means, your life would be frustrating. But instead
you have a rule that says if a person smiles at you, then it means they're happy, or they're friendly, or
maybe they like you. If someone frowns at you, then it triggers another set of rules for what things
mean and what you should do about it. For some people, if someone frowns at them, then their rule is
that the person is in a bad state and should be avoided. Other people, however, might have a rule that
says, "If someone's in a bad state, then I need to change their state."

ARE YOU MUDDLED146 OR PERFECT?
I remember reading an intricate147 story in Gregory Bateson's book 5teps to an Ecology of Mind. It was
a transcript of a conversation he'd had with his daughter years ago, and I'll paraphrase it for you here.
One day she approached him and asked an interesting question: "Daddy, how come things get
muddled so easily?"
He asked her, "What do you mean by 'muddled,' honey?"
She said, "You know. Daddy. When things aren't perfect. Look at my desk right now. Stuff is all over
the place. It's muddled. And just last night I worked so hard to make it perfect. But things don't stay
perfect. They get muddled so easily!"
Bateson asked his daughter, "Show me what it's like when things are perfect." She responded by
moving everything on her shelf into individually assigned positions and said, "There, Daddy, now it's
perfect. But it won't stay that way."
Bateson asked her, "What if I move your paint box over here twelve inches? Then what happens?"
She said, "No, Daddy, now it's muddled. Anyway, it would have to be straight, not all crooked the way
you put it down."
Then he asked her, "What if I moved your pencil from this spot to the next one?"
"Now you're making it muddled again," she responded.
"What if this book were left partially open?" he continued.
"That's muddled, too!" she replied.
Bateson turned to his daughter and said, "Honey, it's not that things get muddled so easily. It's that
you have more ways for things to get muddled. You have only one way for things to be perfect."
Most of us have created numerous ways to feel bad, and only a few ways to truly feel good. I never fail
to be amazed at the overwhelming number of people whose rules wire them for pain. It's as if they
have a vast and intricate network of neural pathways leading to the very states they're trying to avoid,
and yet they have only a handful of neural pathways that they've connected to pleasure.
A classic example of this is a man who attended one of my Date With Destiny seminars. He was a wellknown Fortune 500 executive, beloved by his community for his contributions, a father of five who was
very close to his children and wife, and a man who was physically fit—a marathon runner. I asked him,
146
muddle 1. Durcheinander; be in a muddle durcheinander sein; 2. auch muddle up durcheinander bringen;
muddle through umgangssprachlich: sich durchwursteln
147
intricate verwickelt, kompliziert
"Are you successful?" To the astonishment of all present, he quite seriously answered, "No." I asked
him, "What has to happen in order for you to feel successful?" (Remember, this is the key question
you'll always ask to discover your rules or anyone else's.)
What followed was a litany of rigid rules and requirements that he felt he must meet in order to be
successful in his life. He had to earn $3 million a year in salary (he was currently earning only $1.5
million in straight salary, but an additional $2 million in bonuses—this didn't count, though), he had to
have 8 percent body fat (he was at 9 percent), and he had to never get frustrated with his kids
(remember that he had five of them, all going in different directions in life). What do you think are this
man's chances of feeling successful, when he has to meet all of these intense and arguably
unreasonable criteria simultaneously? Will he ever feel successful?
By contrast, there was another gentleman who we had all noticed was practically bouncing off the
walls because he had so much energy. He seemed to be enjoying the seminar and life to the utmost. I
turned to him and asked the same question: "Are you successful?" He beamed back at me and said,
"Absolutely!" So I asked him, "What has to happen in order for you to feel successful?" With a huge
grin he explained, "It's so easy. All I have to do is get up, look down, and see that I am above
ground!"
The crowd roared. He continued, "Every day above ground is a great day!" This rule has become a
favorite of the Date With Destiny staff, and now at every program we display it to remind each of us
how successful we are the moment we pull back the covers each morning.
Like the CEO who wasn't meeting his own rules, you could be winning and feel like you're losing
because the scorecard you're using is unfair. Not only is it unfair to you, it's also unfair to your spouse
and children, the people you work with every day, and all the others whose lives you touch. If you've
set up a system of rules that causes you to feel frustrated, angry, hurt, or unsuccessful—or you have
no clear rules for knowing when you're happy, successful, and so on—those emotions affect the way
you treat the people around you as well as how they feel when they're near you. Also, whether you are
aware of it or not, often you are judging other people through a set of rules that you may never have
expressed—but we all expect others to comply with our rules, don't we? If you're being hard on
yourself, you're likely to be hard on others as well.
Why would anyone impose such strict regulations on themselves and the people they love most? A lot
of it has to do with cultural conditioning. Many of us are afraid that if we don't have very intense rules,
then we won't be driven to succeed, we won't be motivated to work hard and achieve. The truth is that
you don't have to have ridiculously difficult rules to keep your drive! If a person makes their rules too
intense, too painful, pretty soon they'll begin to realize that no matter what they do, they can't win,
and they begin to experience learned helplessness. We certainly want to use the power of goals, the
allure of a compelling future, to pull ourselves forward, but we must make sure that at the bottom of it
all we have rules to allow us to be happy anytime we want.

DO YOUR RULES EMPOWER OR DISEMPOWER YOU?
We want to develop rules that move us to take action, that cause us to feel joy, that cause us to follow
through—not rules that stop us short. I've found that there are an amazing number of men and
women who set up rules for relationships that make it absolutely impossible for them to succeed in this
area of their lives. For example, some people's rule for love is, "If you love me, then you'll do whatever
I want you to do." Or "If you love me, then I can whine and complain and nag, and you should just
accept it." Are these appropriate rules? Hardly! They'd be unfair to anyone you were sharing a
relationship with.
One woman who attended Date With Destiny told me that she really wanted to have a close
relationship with a man, but just hadn't seemed able to maintain a relationship with one past the initial
"thrill of the chase" phase. As I began to ask her, "What has to happen for you to be attracted to a
man?" her rules helped us both instantly understand what her challenge was. For her to feel attracted
to a man, he had to pursue her constantly, even though she continued to reject him. If he kept
working hard, trying to break down the barrier, that made her feel incredibly attracted to him; to her
this meant he was a very powerful man. But what's interesting was her second rule. If he kept on for
more than a month, she lost her respect and therefore her attraction to him. So guess what normally
would happen? A few men would take her rejection and keep on pursuing her, but of course most
would give up after a short period of time. Thus she would never have a relationship with them. Then,
the few who persisted would secretly have her favor for a while, but after an arbitrary period of about
a month, she'd completely lose interest. She found herself unable to stay attracted to any man for
more than a month because no man was able to anticipate her complex timetable.
What rules do you have that are equally unwinnable? For some people, in order to feel like they're in
control in any context, they have to know what's going to happen in advance of its occurrence. For
others, in order to feel like they're confident in some area, they have to have experience in doing it. If
this were my rule for confidence, I couldn't accomplish most of what I've done in my life! Most of my
success has come from my ability to get myself to feel certain I could achieve something, even though
I had no references for it. My rule for confidence is, "If I decide to be confident, then I'll feel that way
toward anything, and my confidence will help me succeed."
Competence is another interesting rule. Some people's rule for competence is, "If I've done something
perfectly over a period of years, then I'm competent." Other people's rule is, "If I've done it effectively
once, then I'm competent." And for others, competence is, "If I've done anything like it, then I know I
can master this as well, and therefore I'm competent." Do you see the impact these kinds of rules
would have on your confidence, your happiness, your sense of control, the quality of your actions, and
your life?

SET UP THE GAME SO YOU CAN WIN
In the last chapter, we devoted a great deal of time to setting up values. But as I've already stated, if
you don't make the rules achievable, you'll never feel like those values are being met. When I first
started to develop my ideas on designing destiny, I had only the concept of values and not rules, so
whether or not a person felt like they were on track was completely arbitrary. The day I discovered
rules, I began to understand the source of pain and pleasure in our experience. I understood that rules
are the triggering device of human emotion, and began to evaluate how I could use rules more
effectively.
As I've mentioned before, it quickly became clear to me that the majority of people are wired for pain.
Their rules make it very, very difficult to feel good, and very easy to feel bad. Let me give you a
powerful example. Here are the values of a woman we'll call Laurie who attended one of my earliest
Date With Destiny seminars:
LAURIE'S OLD MOVING-TOWARD VALUES
Love
Health
Security
Freedom
Success
Acceptance
Excellence
Harmony
Respect
Integrity
Honesty
Fun
At first glance, these values look wonderful, don't they? You would think that this person is probably
loving and healthy and freedom-oriented. With a closer look, though, we can already see a few
challenges.
Laurie's third value is security, and her fourth value is freedom. Do those two sound like they go well
together? The reality was that this woman was wired for massive pain. She was frustrated in every
sense of the word, and was literally becoming a recluse148, hiding out from people. No therapist she'd
visited could figure out why. They were all working on her behaviors, her fears, and her emotions,
instead of looking at the way her Master System of evaluating every event and experience of her life
was wired.
So I began to elicit her rules for each of her values: "What has to happen in order for you to feel
?" For her to feel love, her answer was, "I have to feel like I've earned it. I have to feel like
all my beliefs are accepted and approved of by every person I meet. I can't feel like I'm loved unless
I'm perfect. I have to be a great mother, a great wife," and so forth.
Instantly we began to see the problem. Love was the highest value on her list, the greatest source of
pleasure she could possibly feel in her body. Yet her rules did not allow her to give herself this
pleasure unless she met these complex criteria which she couldn't control! If any of us made our ability
148

recluse Einsiedler(in)
to feel loved dependent on everyone accepting our views, we wouldn't feel love very often, would we?
There are just too many people with different ideas and beliefs, and therefore too many ways for us to
feel bad.
How do we know if a rule empowers or disempowers us? There are three primary criteria:
1. It's a disempowering rule if it's impossible to meet. If your criteria are so complex or varied or
intense that you can't ever win the game of life, clearly you have a disempowering rule.
2. A rule is disempowering if something that you can't control determines whether your rule has been
met or not. For example, if other people have to respond to you in a certain way, or if the environment
has to be a certain way, you clearly have a disempowering rule. A classic example of this is the people
waiting to view the eclipse who couldn't be happy unless the weather—something they couldn't
control—acted according to their specific expectations.
3. A rule is disempowering if it gives you only a few ways to feel good and lots of ways to feel bad.
Laurie had managed to meet all three of these criteria for disempowering rules, hadn't she? Having to
feel that all her beliefs were accepted and approved by people was an impossible criterion. It required
the outside environment, something she could not control—other people's opinions—to make her feel
good. It provided lots of ways to feel bad, and provided no clear way to feel good. Here are some of
the rest of her rules for her values hierarchy:

LAURIE'S OLD MOVING-TOWARD VALUES AND RULES
Love: I have to feel like I've earned it, like all my beliefs are accepted and approved. I can't feel like
I'm loved unless I'm perfect. I have to be a great mother and wife.
Health: I have to feel like my diet is perfect by my strict standards.
I have to be completely free of physical pain. I must feel like I'm healthier than everyone I know and
be an example.
Security: Everyone must like me. I must feel that everyone I meet is certain I'm a good person. I must
be certain that there will be no nuclear war. I must have much more money in my savings account
than I already do.
Freedom: I must be in control of my working demands, hours, fees, opinions, etc. I must be financially
secure enough not to live under stress or financially related pressure.

How likely do you think it is that Laurie will meet one of her values, much less any? What about her
rules for health? "I have to feel like my diet is perfect by my strict standards." She was not only a
vegetarian, but ate only raw food, and she still didn't feel perfect! What are your chances of being
healthier than everyone you know? Not much, unless you hang out in the intensive care unit!

LAURIE'S OLD MOVING-AWAY-FROM VALUES AND RULES
Rejection: I feel rejected if someone doesn't share my beliefs, if someone seemingly knows more than
I do.
Failure: I feel failure if someone doesn't believe I'm a good person. I feel failure if I don't feel I support
myself or my family well enough.
Anger: I feel anger when I don't feel like what I do is appreciated, when people judge me before they
know me.

These moving-away-from rules are equally immobilizing. Notice how easy it is to feel bad, and how
hard it is to feel good. If all it takes for her to feel rejected is someone not sharing her beliefs, then
she's in for a lot of heartache. And what are the chances in your life of having people judge you before
they know you? Only about one hundred percent! With these rules, can you imagine what it would be
like to live in her body? She was racked with pain, and one of her biggest sources, if you look at her
rules, was people. Any time she was around people, she was risking the possibility they might not
share her beliefs, or might not like her, or might judge her. No wonder she was hiding out! At one
point I finally said, "It's my guess that a person with values and rules like this would develop an
ulcer149." She said, "I already have one."
Laurie's experience, unfortunately, is not unique. Certainly some of her rules are more intense than
others. But you will be absolutely surprised when you find out how unfair your own rules are when you
begin to scrutinize150 them! At Date With Destiny, we attract some of the most successful people in the
country—people whose level of skill and influence in the culture is unmatched. And yet, while they're
successful on the outside, many are lacking the happiness and fulfillment they deserve. Invariably, it's
because of values conflicts or inappropriate rules.

THE SOLUTION
The solution is very simple. All we have to do to make our lives work is set up a system of evaluating
that includes rules that are achievable, that make it easy to feel good and hard to feel bad, that
constantly pull us in the direction we want to go. Certainly it's useful to have some rules that give us
pain. We need to have limits; we need to have some kind of pressure that drives us. I can't taste fresh
orange juice unless I have a glass, something with limits to contain the juice. We all have limits, both
as a society and as individuals. For starters, though, we should at least rewire ourselves so we can
experience pleasure more consistently in life. When people are feeling good all the time, they tend to
treat others better, and they tend to maximize their potential as human beings.
So what's our goal? Once we design our values, we must decide what evidence we need to have before
we give ourselves pleasure. We need to design rules that will move us in the direction of our values,
that will clearly be achievable, using criteria we can control personally so that we're ringing the bell
instead of waiting for the outside world to do it.
Based on these requirements, Laurie changed the order of some of her values and completely changed
her rules for achieving them. Here are her new values and rules:

149
150

ulcer MEDIZIN Geschwür
scrutinize genau prüfen; mustern
LAUME'S NEW MOVING-TOWARD VALUES AND RULES
Love: I experience love anytime I express love, give love to others, or allow myself to receive it.
Health: I am healthy when I acknowledge how wonderful I already feel!
Fun: I'm having fun when I find pleasure and joy in the process.
Gratitude: I feel grateful when I appreciate all the things I have in my life right now.
Freedom: I feel free when I live by my convictions and accept the choice to create happiness for
myself.

Notice that fun is now a priority. This transformed her experience of life, not to mention her
relationship with her daughter and husband. But even more powerful were the changes she made in
her rules. Changing the values would have limited impact if the rules were unachievable.
What has this woman done? She has rewired her entire life so that she's in control. You and I need to
remember that our self-esteem is tied to our ability to feel like we're in control of the events in our
environment. These rules allow Laurie to always be in control without even trying.
Are her new rules for love achievable? You bet! Who's in control? She is! At any moment in time, she
can decide to be loving to herself and others, and she'll now have permission to give herself the
emotion called love. She'll know she's meeting her highest values. How often can she do this? Every
single day! There are lots of ways to do it because there are lots of people she can be loving to: herself,
her family, her friends, and strangers. How about her new rule for health? What's beautiful about it is
that not only is she in charge—because she can acknowledge how wonderful she feels at any
moment—and not only is it achievable, but isn't it true that if she regularly acknowledges feeling good,
she'll reinforce the pattern of becoming more healthy?
In addition, Laurie adopted some new moving-away-from values. She selected emotions she knew she
had to avoid indulging in order to succeed: negativity and procrastination. Remember, we want to
reverse the process of how most of us are wired. We want to make it hard to feel bad, and easy to feel
good.

LAURJE'S NEW MOVING-AWAY-FROM VALUES AND RULES
Negativity: I avoid consistently depending on the acceptance of others for my ultimate happiness and
success.
Procrastination: I avoid consistently expecting perfection from myself and others.

With Laurie's new moving-away-from rules, she no longer depends upon the acceptance of others. Her
rule for procrastination is based on her realization that expecting perfection created pain, and she
hadn't wanted to begin projects that would create pain, so that's why she'd been procrastinating.
These changes in values and rules have redirected her life to a level beyond anything she could have
imagined.
Now, here's an assignment for you: based on the new values you've set up for yourself in the last
chapter, create a set of rules for your moving-toward values that makes it easy to feel good, and a set
of rules for your moving-away-from values that makes it hard to feel bad. Ideally, create a menu of
possibilities with lots of ways to feel good. Here are a few of mine:

A SAMPLING OF MY MOVING-TOWARD VALUES AND RULES
Health and Vitality: Anytime I feel centered, powerful, or balanced; anytime I do anything that
increases my strength, flexibility, or endurance; anytime I do anything that moves me toward a sense
of physical well-being; anytime I eat water-rich foods or live in accordance with my own health
philosophy.
Love and Warmth: Anytime I'm being warm and supportive of my friends, family, or strangers;
anytime I focus on how to help; anytime I'm loving toward myself; anytime my state of being
enhances how other people feel.
Learning and Growing: Anytime I make a new distinction that's useful; anytime I stretch myself
beyond what was comfortable; anytime I think of a new possibility; anytime I expand or become more
effective; anytime I apply anything I know in a positive way.
Achieving: Anytime I focus on the value of my life as already created; anytime I set an outcome and
make it happen; anytime I learn anything or create value for myself or others.

You may say, "Isn't this just a game? Couldn't I set it up so that I meet my rule for health just by
breathing?" Certainly you could base it on something this simple. Ideally, though, you'll design your
rules so that by pursuing them you have more of what you want in your life. You also may say, "Won't
I lose my drive to succeed if there's no pain motivation?" Trust me. Life will give you enough pain on
your own if you don't follow through. You don't need to add to it by creating an intense set of rules
that makes you feel lousy all the time.
In sociology there's a concept known as "ethnocentricity," which means we begin to believe that the
rules, values, and beliefs of our culture are the only ones that are valid. This is an extremely limiting
mindset.
Every person around you has different rules and values than you do, and theirs are no better or worse
than your own. The key question is not whether rules are right or wrong, but whether they empower
or disempower you. In fact. . .

EVERY UPSET IS A RULES UPSET
Think about the last time you were upset with someone. Was it really about them, or was it about
something they did, or said, or failed to do that you thought they ought to? Were you angry at them,
or were you angry because they violated one of your rules? At the base of every emotional upset
you've ever had with another human being is a rules upset. Somebody did something, or failed
to do something, that violated one of your beliefs about what they must or should do.
For example, some people's rule for respect is, "If you respect me, then you never raise your voice." If
a person with whom you're in a relationship suddenly starts to yell, you're not going to feel respected
if this is your rule. You're going to be angry because it has been violated. But your partner's rule may
be, "If I'm respectful, then I'm truthful about all my feelings and all my emotions—good, bad, and
indifferent—and I express them with all my intensity in the moment." Can you imagine the conflict
these two people can have?
This was the scenario played out between Becky and me when we first began to develop our
relationship. We had radically different rules about how to show respect for another person. Why? I
grew up in an environment where you got a lot of pain if you weren't honest. If you walked out of the
room in the middle of a conversation, you would never live it down. The number-one rule was that you
hung in there and expressed your honest emotions, knowing you could be wrong, but you stayed there
until everything was worked out.
Meanwhile, Becky grew up in a family where the rules were quite different but equally clear. She was
taught, "If you don't have something good to say, don't say anything at all; if you have respect for
someone, you never raise your voice to them; if someone else ever raises their voice, the only way to
keep your self-respect is to get up and leave the room."
With this kind of conflict between our rules for respect, Becky and I drove each other crazy. We almost
didn't get married because of this. Rules determine everything—where we go, what we wear, who we
are, what's acceptable to us, what's unacceptable, who we have as friends, and whether we're happy
or sad in virtually any situation.
Some people's rule for handling upset is, "If you care about me, then you leave me alone and let me
deal with it my own way." Other people's rule is, "If somebody's upset, and you care about them, you
immediately intervene to try to help." This creates a tremendous conflict. Both people are trying to
accomplish the same thing, which is to respect and care about each other, but their rules dictate
different behaviors, and their rules of interpretation will make their actions seem adversarial rather
than supportive. So if you ever feel angry or upset with someone, remember, it's your rules that are
upsetting you, not their behavior. This will help you to stop blaming them. You can get past your upset
quickly by first stopping and asking yourself, "Am I reacting to this, or am I responding to the situation
intelligently?" Then, communicate with that person right up front and say something like, "I'm sorry I
responded the way I did. It's just that you and I have different rules about what we need to do in this
situation.
My expectations are that if you respect me, you'll do_______ and _______ . I know those aren't your
rules. So please tell me what your rules are. How do you express respect, [love, caring, concern,
etc.]?"
Once you're both clear on what the other person wants, then you can make a deal. Ask them, "Would
you be willing to do _______ to make me feel respected? I'd be willing to do _______ for you." Any
relationship—business or personal— can be instantly transformed just by getting clear on the rules and
making an agreement to play by them.
After all, how can you ever hope to win a game if you don't even know the rules?

THE CHALLENGE OF CHANGING RULES
Have you ever found yourself in a situation where you knew what the rules were, but all of a sudden
exceptions started cropping up? People have the unique ability to call upon sub-rules that may be in
conflict with all their other rules. A good metaphor for this might be if you and I decide to play baseball
together, and I ask you, "Do you know how to play baseball?" and you say, "Of course." Then you'd
review the basics: "We'd play nine innings, the person who scores the most runs wins, you've got to
touch all the bases, you get three outs, and so on. If you hit a pop fly and I catch it, you're out. If I
drop it, you're safe."
So we start the game. Everything's going great until the bottom of the ninth, when the score is tied, I
have two men on and one man out, and, I hit a high pop fly to the infield. My rules say that if you
catch the ball, I'm out and the game is over, but if you drop it, I'm safe and the men on base have a
chance to score, and I could win this game. I immediately run to base; you go for the ball and drop it.
I'm thrilled, I'm on base, my teammate scores, and I think we've won the game.
But you come to me and say, "No, you're out!" I say, "What are you talking about? You dropped the
ball! The rules are that if you drop ball, then I'm safe." And then you say, "That's true, except when
there are two men on and one man out. In that case, even if I drop the ball then you're still out. That's
the one exception."
I protest, "You can't make up rules as we're going along!" You would answer, "I didn't make this up.
It's called the infield fly rule. Everyone knows about it." I turn to my teammates, and they say no such
rule exists. You turn to your teammates, and they all say that that's the rule—and we all end up
fighting over the rules.
Have you ever had this experience in a personal relationship? You were playing by all the rules, and all
of a sudden someone said, "Yes, that's true, except in this one situation," and you went ballistic.
People feel very intensely about their rules. Everyone knows their rules are the right rules. People get
especially angry when they think others are making up rules or changing them along the way. Yet this
dynamic is a part of most interactions with other human beings.

PARADOXICAL PROVERBS
Look before you leap.
Too many cooks spoil the broth.
Absence makes the heart grow fonder.
You can't teach an old dog new tricks.
The grass is always greener on the other side of the fence.
A penny saved is a penny earned.
He who hesitates is lost.
Two heads are better than one.
Out of sight, out of mind.
It's never too late to learn.
There's no place like home.
You can't take it with you.

In fact, the paradox of conflicting beliefs and rules is one of the reasons people find so much
frustration in their lives. In a relationship, one person says, "I love you, except when you leave the
cap off the toothpaste," or "I love you, except when you raise your voice at me." Some of these subrules seem totally trivial, but they can be very damaging. The best way to deal with this is to
remember that your rules are not based on reality. They're purely arbitrary151. Just because you've
used them and feel strongly about them doesn't mean they're the best rules or the right rules. Rules
should be designed to empower our relationships, not destroy them. Any time a rule gets in the way,
the question we need to ask ourselves is, "What's more important? My relationship or my rules?"
Suppose your trust was once violated in a romantic relationship, and now you're afraid to get close to
anyone else again. You now have a rule that says, "If you get too close, you'll get hurt." At the same
time, your highest value is love, and your rule is that in order to feel love, you must get close to
someone. Now you have a major conflict: your rules and values are in absolute opposition. What can
you do in this situation? The first step is to realize that you have conflicting rules. The second step is to
link enough pain to any rule that doesn't serve you, and replace it with a rule that does. Most
important, if you want to have quality relationships with other people, whether it's in your business or
personal life, you must. . .

COMMUNICATE YOUR RULES
If you want to take control of your life, if you want to do well in business, if you want to be a great
negotiator, if you want to be able to impact your children, if you want to be close to your spouse, then
make sure you discover the rules they have for a relationship up front, and communicate ; yours as
well. Don't expect people to live by your rules if you don't clearly communicate what they
are. And don't expect people to live by your rules if you're not willing to compromise and live by some
of theirs. For example, in the beginning of any relationship, one of the first things I do is let the other
party know my rules for the situation, and try to find out as many of their rules as possible. I ask
things like "What will it take for you to know that our relationship is working? How often do
we have to communicate? What is necessary?"
For example, I was once talking with a friend of mine who is a well-known celebrity, and he shared
with me that he didn't feel like he had very many friends. I said, "Are you sure you don't have many
friends? I see lots of people around you who truly do care about you. Is it that you have rules that
eliminate a lot of people who could be your friends?" He said, "It just doesn't feel like they're my
151

arbitrary willkürlich, eigenmächtig
friends." I said, "What has to happen for you to feel like they're your friends?" He said, "Well, I guess I
don't even know what my rules are, consciously." After giving it some thought, he identified one of his
top rules for friendship: if you're a friend of his, then you talk with him at least two, or three times a
week. "That's an interesting rule," I thought. "I have friends all over the world, people I truly love. But
sometimes, even with my best friends, a month or more may go by before we get a chance to talk
again, just because of the intensity of our schedules. Often I'll be in seminars from early morning until
very late at night, and then I may have had 100 phone calls in that day. There's no physical way I
could talk to all those people! Yet they all know they're my friends."
Then I asked him, "Do you think I'm your friend?" He said, "Well, intellectually I know you are, but
sometimes it doesn't feel like it because we don't talk together often enough." I said, "Wow, I never
knew that! I never would have known that was important to you if you hadn't communicated it to me.
I bet you have lots of friends who might love meeting your rules for friendship if they just knew what
they were." My definition for friendship is quite simple: if you're a friend, then you absolutely love a
person unconditionally, and you'll do anything you can to support them. If they call you when they're
in trouble or truly in need, you're there for them. Months go by, yet the friendship would never weaken
once you decide that somebody is truly your friend. That's it! You never question it again. I think I
have lots of friends because my rules for friendship are so easy to meet! All you have to do is care
about me and love me, and I'll care about you and love you, and now we're friends.
It's so important to communicate your rules for any situation in life, whether it's love, friendship, or
business. By the way, even if you clarify all the rules in advance, can misunderstandings still occur?
You bet. Sometimes you'll forget to communicate one of your rules, or you may not even consciously
know what some of your rules are. That's why ongoing communication is so important. Never assume
when it comes to rules. Communicate.

THERE ARE SOME RULES YOU CANNOT BREAK!
The more I began to study people's behavior and the impact of their rules, the more interested I
became in a dynamic that I noticed consistently, and that was that there are certain rules that people
would never violate, and other rules that they would violate continuously—they'd feel bad about it each
time, but they'd go ahead and do it anyway. What was the difference?
After some research, the answer became clear: we have a hierarchy of rules, just as we do values.
There are certain rules that, to break them, would give us such intense pain that we don't even
consider the possibility. We will rarely, if ever, break them. I call these rules threshold rules. For
example, if I asked you, "What's something you would never do?," you'd give me a threshold rule.
You'd tell me a rule that you would never violate. Why? Because you link too much pain to it.
Conversely, we have some rules that we don't want to break. I call these personal standards. If we do
break them, we don't feel good about it, but depending upon the reasons, we're willing to break them
in the short term. The difference between these two rules is often phrased with the words must and
should. We have certain things that we must do, certain things that we must not do, certain things
that we must never do, and certain things that we must always do. The "must" and the "must never"
rules are threshold rules; the "should" and "should never" rules are personal standard rules. All of
them give a structure to our lives.
Too many "must" rules can make life unlivable. I once saw a program that featured twenty families of
quintuplets. Each set of parents was asked, "What is the most important thing you've learned for
maintaining sanity?" The one message that was echoed repeatedly was: Don't have too many rules.
With this many bodies in motion, and this many different personalities, if you've got too many rules,
you'll go crazy. The law of averages says your rules are going to be violated constantly, and therefore
you're going to be in continual stress, reacting to everything.
This kind of stress affects you and the people around you. Think of the rules we have today for women
in our society. They even have a name for it: the "Superwoman Syndrome." Women today seem to
have to do everything, and do it perfectly. Not only do they have to take care of their husband,
children, parents, and friends, but they have to have the perfect body, they have to go out and change
the world, they have to prevent nuclear war, and they have to be the consummate business person on
top of it all. Do you think that could create a little stress in life, having that many musts in order to feel
successful?
Of course, women aren't the only ones in society who are going through this—today's men and
children are also under tremendous stress because of increased expectations. If we're burdened with
too many musts to meet, we lose our enthusiasm and zest152 for life; we just don't want to play the
game anymore. High self-esteem comes from feeling like you have control over events, not that
events have control over you. And when you have a lot of "must" rules, the chances of them being
violated are great.
What would be a "must never" rule in a relationship? Many people might say, "My husband or wife
must never have an extramarital affair." For other people, however, that's only a should rule: "My
husband or wife should never have an extramarital affair." Might that difference in rules have the
potential to create problems down the road? It's highly possible. In fact, when people have relationship
upsets, invariably it's because although they've agreed on the rules, they haven't agreed on whether
it's a "must never" or a "should never." It's necessary not only to understand what kinds of rules your
partner has, but also to keep in mind that both "must" and "should" rules are appropriate.
In order to achieve certain outcomes, it's important to have plenty of "must" rules to make sure that
we'll follow through, that we'll take action. For example, I have a friend who's in superb physical
condition. What's interesting is her set of rules for herself in the area of health: she has very few
shoulds and a lot of musts. I asked her, "What must you never do if you want to be healthy?" She said,
"I must never smoke. I must never violate my body with drugs. I must never pig out. I must never go
more than a day without exercising."
Then I asked, "What must you do in order to be healthy?" Again, the list was long: "I must exercise
every day for at least half an hour. I must eat the right kinds of foods. I must eat only fruit in the
morning. I must combine my foods properly. I must ride at least fifty miles on my bicycle every week."

152

zest übertragen Würze; Begeisterung; zest for life Lebensfreude
And the list went on. Finally I asked for her "should" rules. She said, "I should exercise more." And
that was it!
Now, this woman has an overweight friend. When I asked her what she must never do in order to be
healthy, she gazed153 at me with a blank stare154. She had no "must never" rules in the area of health!
She did have a couple of must rules, however: she must eat, and she must sleep. Then I asked if she
had any "should" rules. "Sure," she said, "I should eat better; I should exercise. I should take better
care of my body." She also had a list of "should not" rules such as, "I should not eat meat, I should
not overeat," and so on. This woman had plenty of things she knew she should do, but because she
had very few "must" rules, she never got into the position of giving herself intense pain for doing
unhealthy things.
And it wasn't difficult to realize why she had never been able to keep the weight off. If you've ever
procrastinated on anything, were you perhaps using some "should" rules such as, "I should start this
project" or "I should begin an exercise program"? What would have happened instead if you had
decided, "I must start this project" or "I must start this exercise program," and then followed through
by conditioning it into your nervous system?
Remember, we all need some structure. Some people have no clear rules for when they're successful.
Rules can provide the contextual environment for us to create added value. Rules can motivate us to
follow through; they can cause us to grow and expand. Your goal is simply to create a balance
between your "must" rules and your "should" rules and to utilize both types of rules in the appropriate
context.

RULES REALIGNMENT
Right now, begin to take control of your rules by writing down your answers to the following questions.
Make your answers as thorough as possible.
1. What does it take for you to feel successful?
2. What does it take for you to feel loved—by your kids, by your spouse, by your parents, and by
whoever else is important to you?
3. What does it take for you to feel confident?
4. What does it take for you to feel you are excellent in any area of your life?
Now look at these rules and ask yourself, "Are they appropriate? Have I made it really hard to feel
good and easy to feel bad?" Do you have 129 things that must happen before you feel loved? Does it
take only one or two things to make you feel rejected?
If that's true, change your criteria and come up with rules that empower you. What do your rules need
to be in order for you to be happy and successful in this endeavor? Here's a critical distinction: design

153
154

gaze 1. (starrer) Blick; !! nicht Gaze; 2. starren; gaze at starren auf (Akkusativ), anstarren
stare 1. starren; stare at jemanden anstarren; 2. (starrer) Blick, Starren
your rules so that you're in control, so that the outside world is not what determines whether you feel
good or bad. Set it up so that it's incredibly easy for you to feel good, and incredibly hard to feel bad.
For the rules that govern your moving-toward values, use the phrase "Anytime I..." In other words,
create a menu of possibilities of ways to feel good. For example, "I feel love anytime I give love, or
anytime I spend time with people I love, or anytime I smile at someone new, or anytime I talk with an
old friend, or anytime I notice someone doing something nice for me, or anytime I appreciate those
who already love me." Do you notice what you've done? You've made the game winnable by stacking
the deck outrageously in your favor!
Come up with tons of ways to satisfy your rules for feeling love; make it incredibly easy to experience
that pleasure, and make sure to include plenty of criteria that are under your sole control, so you don't
have to depend on anyone or anything else to feel good. Any time you do any of these things, you
would feel love—not just by meeting some outlandish155 criterion that only occurred about as often as
a total eclipse of the sun! By the way, I have a rule for you: while you're doing this, you must have
fun! Get outrageous; explore the outer edges. You've been using rules all your life to hold you back;
why not get a few laughs at their expense? Maybe in order to feel love, all you have to do is wiggle
your little toe. It sounds weird156, but who am I to decide what gives you pleasure?
Now, be sure to discover the rules of the people around you. Go out and do some polling. Find out
what your kids' rules are for being a family member, or for being successful in school, or for having fun.
I bet you'll be amazed at what you discover! Find out your spouse's rules; ask your parents; ask your
boss or your employees. One thing is sure: if you don't know the rules, you're guaranteed to lose
because you're bound to violate them sooner or later. But if you understand people's rules, you can
predict their behavior; you can truly meet their needs and thus enrich the quality of your relationships.
Remember, the most empowering rule is to enjoy yourself no matter what happens.
In the past few chapters we've nearly completed learning about the five elements of the Master
System. We know the importance of state, the way questions direct our focus and evaluations, and the
power of values and rules to shape our lives. Now let's discover the fabric from which all these
elements are cut...

155
156

outlandish befremdlich, sonderbar
weird unheimlich; umgangssprachlich: sonderbar, verrückt
17
REFERENCES: THE FABRIC OF LIFE
"Man's mind stretched to a new idea never goes back to its original dimensions."
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES

As he stood on the flight deck, the young lieutenant watched a jet plane skid out of control onto the
aircraft carrier, a wing slashing157 out and nearly cutting in half a man standing only a few feet away.
The only thing that pulled him through the horror of the moment was the booming voice of his
commanding officer shouting at him: "Somebody get a broom158, and sweep these guts off the deck!"
There was no time to think.
He had to respond immediately. He and his fellow crewmen swept their comrade159's body parts off the
landing strip. In that instant, nineteen-year- old George Bush had no choice but to learn to deal with
the carnage of war. It would be a memory he would recite often to describe the shock of violent death
and the necessity to be able to respond.
Another experience that shaped his life was a bombing mission he flew not long after the tragedy on
the ship's deck. He was sent to bomb a radio tower on a small island in the South Pacific. Chichi Jima
was a Prisoner of War facility run by an infamous Japanese officer, Matoba, who Bush and his crew
knew had committed brutal war crimes against his prisoners: such unbelievable atrocities160 as
cannibalizing some of the men and putting their remains into the soup for meat, feeding it to the other
prisoners, and then telling them afterward that they had eaten human flesh.
As young George Bush approached the target, he was absolutely resolved to isolate this madman by
destroying his only tool of communication: the radio tower. As he approached his bombing run, he was
hit by enemy attack. Smoke filled the cabin, but he was determined to hit his mark. In the final
seconds, he managed to release the bomb, smashing the target and destroying the antenna. Instantly
he gave the orders to eject. He turned the plane back out to sea, and when his turn came, the bailout
didn't take place as planned. His body was slammed against the tail of the aircraft, tearing a portion of
his parachute and grazing161 his head.

157

slash 1. auf-, zerschlitzen; Preise drastisch herabsetzen; Ausgaben und so weiter drastisch kürzen; slash at
schlagen nach; 2. Hieb; Schlitz (im Kleid und so weiter); INFORMATIONSTECHNOLOGIE Schrägstrich
158
broom Besen männlich
159
comrade Kamerad; (Partei)Genosse
160
atrocity Scheußlichkeit; Greueltat
161
graze Vieh weiden (lassen); (ab)weiden; (ab)grasen graze 1. streifen; schrammen; Haut (ab-, auf)schürfen,
(auf)schrammen; 2. Abschürfung, Schramme
The damaged parachute functioned only partially in breaking his fall, but just before he hit the water,
he cut himself loose. Struggling back to the surface with blood oozing162 from his head wound, he
desperately groped163 for his life raft. He found it, but as he dragged himself into it, he saw that
the water and food canisters had been destroyed upon impact with the aircraft's tail.
To make matters worse, the current was slowly pulling him directly toward the beach of the island he'd
just bombed. Can you imagine what they would do to him? As his raft was drawn closer and closer to
the shore, his fear grew. Then, suddenly, he began to see something in the water. At first he thought it
was his imagination, then he realized it was a periscope. He was about to become a prisoner of the
Japanese.
But as the huge submarine began to lift out of the water in front of him, he realized it was the Finback,
an American submarine! He was rescued, but only in time for him to have to endure yet more peril164.
Upon picking up Bush, the Finback dropped quickly as the enemy boats approached and began
dropping depth charges on the submarine. All the Finback could do was dive and remain totally still.
The crew was unable to do anything but call upon their faith and pray that the explosives would not
destroy them.
George Bush not only survived this experience, but also completed many other successful bombing
missions, and returned a war hero. He said that his days upon that submarine were some of the most
important of his life—days when he began to think about destiny, about who he was and why he was
put on earth.
What role did these experiences play in shaping the character, identity, and destiny of George Bush?
Clearly, they became the fabric from which many of his core beliefs and values would be cut—the
fabric I call reference experiences—these experiences would be part of what would guide him more
than forty years later to becoming President of the United States. They also helped to mold his beliefs
and his sense of certainty that good must "stand up to evil." They gave him a sense of confidence that
if he gave his all and didn't give up, he would produce the results he desired against all odds. How do
you think these references shaped his actions almost five decades later as he sat in the Oval Office,
contemplating his response to Saddam Hussein's unprovoked invasion of friendly Kuwait?
If we want to understand why people do what they do, a review of the most significant and impactful
reference experiences of their lives certainly gives us clues. References—the fifth element of a person's
Master System—really provide the essence, or the building blocks, for our beliefs, rules, and values.
They are the clay from which our Master System is molded. There is no doubt that a person who has
experienced and triumphed over tremendous adversity clearly has strong references from which to
build a consistent level of confidence—a belief or faith in themselves and in others, and the capacity to
overcome challenges.
The larger the number and greater the quality of our references, the greater our potential level of
choices. A larger number and greater quality of references enables us to more effectively evaluate
what things mean and what we can do. The reason I say "potential" choice is that, while references
provide us with the foundational ingredients of our beliefs, we often fail to organize our references in
162
163
164

ooze sickern; ooze away übertragen schwinden; absondern; übertragen ausstrahlen, verströmen
grope tasten
peril Gefahr weiblich
ways that strengthen us. For example, a young man may have tremendous confidence and skill on the
football field, but when he enters his history class, he may fail to summon that same sense of certainty
that could help him to maximize his potential as well in the classroom as he does when he's facing his
foe across the line on the gridiron. If he approached football with the same attitude of defeat or doubt
as he did his history class, he'd be incredibly ineffective.
What determines which of our references we use? Clearly, the emotional state we're in will radically
impact which files—i.e., which memories, emotions, feelings, sensations that we've stored—are
available to us. When we're in a fearful state, only the references we've associated with those fearful
sensations in the past seem to come to mind, and we find ourselves caught up in a loop ("fear" leading
to "reference of fear" leading to "multiplied fear").
If we're feeling hurt by someone, we tend to open the file and remember every other experience when
that person hurt us, rather than changing our state by remembering how this person really feels about
us, remembering times when they've been loving to us. Therefore, the state we're in will determine
how much of this fabric is available for the creation of a quality life. Another factor besides state is to
have an expanded reference system, one that can clearly add to our level of understanding as to what
is possible and what we're capable of, no matter what challenges may arise.
There's no doubt references are one of the most important elements of our decision-making process.
They clearly will shape not only what we do, but how we feel and who we become. Contrast Saddam
Hussein's reference experiences with George Bush's. We know that Saddam's father physically abused
him, that his uncle taught him how to nurture a grudge165 and to hate the English "overlords." While
Bush was rewarded for heroism, Saddam's role models were those who learned to control others with
murder and propaganda.
Over a period of about fifteen to twenty years, Saddam repeatedly attempted to oust166 the leader of
Iraq, killing anyone who got in his way. As a result, he doesn't perceive setbacks, regardless of how
bloody—as failures; he's come to believe that in the long run he'll always succeed.
This is a belief, by the way, that has allowed him to prevail even after his defeat in the Persian Gulf
War. By the age of forty-two he had eliminated his opponents and taken control of Iraq. To many,
Saddam is a monster, and people often wonder how the Iraqis can support him. The answer is that
Iraqis perceive Saddam Hussein as one who helped turn things around in their country: he helped to
provide better housing, education, and so on. To the Iraqis, he is a hero. Besides, all Iraqis from the
age of four or five are taught that he's a hero. His image is displayed everywhere, and they see only
his best side on nationally controlled television.
Did Saddam Hussein become a murderer purely because of his references of being abused as a child?
Far from it. Many people have emerged from very similar reference experiences as compassionate and
sensitive people who, because of their pain, would never allow anyone else to be abused around them.
Many of these people strive to help others. Could someone else have been on that same ship with
George Bush and been devastated by the death of their friend, and used that as a reference for the

165
166

grudge 1. missgönnen (someone something jemandem etwas); 2. Groll
oust verdrängen, hinauswerfen (from aus); jemanden seines Amtes entheben
belief that life is not worth living or that war is never justified? You bet. Once again, it's not our
references, but our interpretations of them, the way we organize them—that clearly determine
our beliefs.
Which references play the largest role in our life's experiences? It all depends on what we get
reinforced for. Saddam was rewarded for cutting a wide swath of murder and destruction en route to
leadership of his country. George Bush was reinforced constantly for his focus on "doing the right
thing," contributing, and helping those in need. These reinforcements helped to create foundations for
very different destinies for these men's lives.

WHAT ARE REFERENCES?
References are all the experiences of your life that you've recorded within your nervous system—
everything you've ever seen, heard, touched, tasted, or smelled—stored away inside the giant file
cabinet of your brain. Some references are picked up consciously, others unconsciously.
Some result from experiences you've had yourself; others consist of information you've heard from
others, and all your references, like all human experience, become somewhat distorted, deleted, and
generalized as you record them within your nervous system. In fact, you also have references for
things that have never happened—anything you've ever imagined in your mind is also stored in your
brain as a memory.
Many of these references are organized to support beliefs and, as you learned in Chapter 4, a belief is
nothing but a feeling of certainty about what something means. If you believe you are intelligent, it's
because you have activated certain references to support that feeling of certainty.
Maybe you've had the experience of successfully tackling mental challenges, such as acing a test or
running a business well. All of these reference experiences act as "table legs" to support the idea, or
"table-top," that you are intelligent.
We have enough references within us to back up any idea we want: that we're confident or that we're
weak, that we care or that we're selfish. The key is to expand the references that are available within
your life.
Consciously seek out experiences that expand your sense of who you are and what you're capable of,
as well as organize your references in empowering ways.
"The knowledge of the world is only to be acquired in the world, and not in a closet."
LORD CHESTERFIELD
Not long ago I heard about a man who found $35,000 cash in a bag on the street. He instantly sought
out and returned it to the owner. Everyone who heard the story wanted to congratulate this man, but
he shied away from the media and refused to be filmed. He adamantly167 insisted that returning the
money was the right and only thing he could do. It turned out that this money was the life savings of a
167

adamant übertragen unerbittlich
sixty-eight-year-old woman, and through his one act he probably saved her financial life, yet he
refused to take credit. Why? Clearly the references of his past had helped him to develop a belief that
taking credit for doing what obviously was the right thing would be totally inappropriate. He didn't
decide to avoid the recognition on a whim; he had a sense of certainty that only his life references
could create.
Think of your references, both those you consider to be good and bad, as a giant bolt of fabric woven
from your experiences. With the other elements of your Master System—your state, questions, values,
and beliefs—you cut a pattern from this fabric that enables you to make decisions about what to do
with your life. You have an inexhaustible supply of references that can be designed any way you wish.
And each day, you're adding to this supply. One important measure of a person's intelligence is the
way in which they use their fabric of references. Do you craft a curtain to hide behind, or do you
fashion a magic carpet that will carry you to unequalled heights? Do you consciously dig through your
life experience and pull out those memories that empower you most on a consistent basis?
As you learned in Chapter 4, probably one of the most valuable things that references do for us is to
provide a feeling of certainty. Without them, we would live our whole lives afraid or in doubt; we
wouldn't be able to function. Would it disturb you if this book suddenly levitated, floated away, and
came to rest five feet in front of you? The only reason you would feel any fear is that you have no
references for this. You'd have no idea how to interpret what it means. Why will a baby reach into a
dirty ashtray, pull out a cigarette butt, and chew on it? Isn't it because they don't have any references
that tell them this is not good for them? (Of course, some adults still haven't figured this one out!)
Let me ask you again. How do you use your references? Do you consciously interpret them in ways
that empower you, in ways that support the achievement of your goals? Or does your brain
automatically latch on to individual experiences where you're not supported, and develop beliefs like
"Everybody's out to get me," or "Every time I try anything, I get knocked down," or "I don't deserve to
be loved"?
The way we use our references will determine how we feel, because whether something is good or bad
is all based on what you're comparing it to. When a businesswoman checks into a hotel room, whether
or not she thinks the room is nice is based on her past references. I guarantee that if you took
someone from Eastern Europe and got them a room in the simplest budget motel here in the United
States, you would find that they'd be thrilled, thinking that these were top-rate accommodations.
Sometimes we lose perspective that good and bad are merely based upon our references.
Date With Destiny is one of my favorite learning environments because I'm able to consistently see
how people's references are being used to shape their behavior. As part of an in-depth questionnaire
participants fill out before the seminar, they list five experiences that they feel have shaped their
entire lives. What they are doing is sharing with me some of their most powerful references, and it
amazes me how many different meanings they take from the same references. Some people have
been raped, sexually abused, abandoned. Some have come from broken or impoverished homes. Yet
some people interpret these experiences in a way that helps them form the belief that their life is not
worth living, and others use it to motivate themselves to study, to expand, to grow, to share, to be
more sensitive.
It's true that Saddam Hussein was abused as a child, but so was Oprah Winfrey. Here is a woman who
was raped and violently mistreated in her youth, yet today she touches millions of lives daily with her
television show. Simply by sharing her own experiences, she has helped people to heal some of the
wounds from their pasts. Millions of Americans feel close to her because they know she understands;
i.e., she has references of pain, just like they do.
"We lift ourselves by our thought, we climb upon our vision of ourselves."
ORISON SWETT MARDEN
References are not limited to your actual experience. Your imagination itself is a source of references.
Remember Roger Bannister and the four-minute mile? No one believed it was physically possible for
human beings to run the mile in less than four minutes, yet he created his own sense of certainty
through imagined references. He visualized over and over again breaking the four-minute mile,
hearing and feeling himself break the barrier until pretty soon he had so many reference legs that he
felt certain he would succeed—as certain as other people were that accomplishing this task was
impossible.
We need to remember that our imagination is ten times more potent than our willpower. Because
Bannister was able to use his imagination as the legs supporting the tabletop of certainty, he was able
to produce a result that was unheard of throughout human history. Imagination unleashed provides us
a sense of certainty and vision that goes far beyond the limitations of the past.
Recently Mr. Akio Morita sent me his book, Made in Japan. Mr. Morita is the co-founder of Sony
Corporation and an unbelievably brilliant man. The destiny of Sony, just like any individual's, is the
result of a series of decisions. In his book, Morita discloses that one of the toughest and most
important decisions he ever made was to turn down an offer from Bulova Corporation to purchase
100,000 of his breakthrough transistor radios—at a time when his company was not even moving
10,000 units a month. The amount of money they offered him was ten times what his company was
worth at the time, yet after deep consideration he rejected the deal.
Why? Simply because Bulova wanted to put their own name on the radio. He realized that while in the
short term saying yes would give his company a huge jump, he would be building Bulova's name
instead of Sony's. The Bulova executives could not believe he would turn down their offer. He told
them, "Fifty years from now, my company's name will be as big as yours, and I know that the radio
I've created is going to help us develop that name."
Of course, all of Morita's partners thought he was crazy. How was he able to create this sense of
certainty that enabled him to turn down such an enticing168 and profitable offer? He vividly imagined
the future of his company, and created references where none existed. He directed his focus and
envisioned his goals with clarity, and then backed it up with absolute and active faith. Today, Sony
Corporation is not only a leader in the electronics industry, generating $27 billion a year, but has also
diversified to industries as far-reaching as film making (acquiring Columbia and Tri-Star Pictures) and
music (acquiring CBS Records and Columbia House), and is renowned for its quality around the world.
168

entice (ver)locken
With faith, you can cling to your vision in the face of seeming failure. What if Thomas Edison had given
up after his first failed attempt to make the electric light bulb? Or even after his hundredth attempt?
Luckily for all of us, he persisted beyond thousands of attempts. He could have taken each instance as
a reference to back up a belief that his invention was not feasible. Instead, he chose to use each failed
attempt as a reference for the belief that he was getting closer to the solution. Remember, don't drive
into the past using your rear-view mirror as a guide. You want to learn from your past, not live in it—
focus on the things that empower you.

READING IS FEEDING YOUR MIND
You are not even limited to your own personal experiences as references. You can borrow the
references of other people. Early in my life, I chose to focus on those who had made it, those who had
succeeded and contributed and were impacting people's lives in a major way. I did so by reading
biographies of successful people and learned that regardless of their background or conditions, when
they held on to their sense of certainty, and consistently contributed, success eventually came. I used
their references as my own, forming the core belief that I could truly shape my own destiny.
Do you remember my friend Captain Gerald Coffee who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam for over
seven years? A good deal of that time was spent in solitary confinement. One of the things that
enabled him to preserve his sanity when the outside world gave him no references for joy was to turn
to his own rich internal world. As a child he had memorized various poems and stories, which he
repeated to himself to create a different "environment" from the one he had to endure day after day.
You don't have to go into solitary confinement to discover the beauty and power of cultivating a
bountiful treasure chest of memories and imagined references. How can you fill that chest? Explore the
wealth of literature, stories, myths, poetry, and music. Read books, view movies and videotapes, listen
to audiotapes, go to seminars, talk with people, and get new ideas. All references have power, and you
never know which one could change your entire life.
The power of reading a great book is that you start thinking like the author. For those magical
moments while you are immersed in the forests of Arden, you are William Shakespeare; while you are
shipwrecked on Treasure Island, you are Robert Louis Stevenson; while you are communing with
nature at Walden, you are Henry David Thoreau. You start to think like they think, feel like they feel,
and use imagination as they would. Their references become your own, and you carry these with you
long after you've turned the last page. That is the power of literature, of a good play, of music; that is
why we constantly want to expand our references.
I used to believe that going to see a play was a waste of time. Why? Because the only plays I had ever
attended were poorly acted, and their pace was painfully slow. But one day Becky and I decided to see
the musical Les Miserables. I have never seen, read, or heard anything that moved me so deeply.
Since then, I've become addicted to great theater, and each time we go to New York City, it's a
priority for us to catch a show.
"Imagination is more important than knowledge."
ALBERT EINSTEIN
One of the finest beliefs I developed years ago that helped me to enjoy all of my life experience was
the idea that there are no bad experiences, that no matter what I go through in life—whether it's a
challenging experience or a pleasurable one—every experience provides me something of value if I
look for it. If I pull just one idea or one distinction from an experience, then it expands me.
Back when I was still in high school and scraping together money any way I could in order to attend
personal development seminars, my friends were amazed that I'd go back to some of the same
seminars again and again. Often they'd ask me, "Why would you go back to the same program?"
Inevitably I'd tell them that I understood the power of repetition, and each time I heard something
new because I was different. Plus I knew that hearing something again and again would eventually
condition me to use it, that repetition truly is the mother of skill. Every time I reviewed a program, I
made additional distinctions or heard ideas that impacted me differently and enabled me to create new
references, and thus new interpretations, new actions, and new results in my life.

USE CONTRAST TO PUT YOUR LIFE IN PERSPECTIVE
While some references ennoble you and give you a higher vision, others show you a side of life you'd
rather not experience. But these are the sorts of references that can be used to help you keep your life
in balance. They provide a new level of contrast. No matter how bad you think things are in your life,
it's good to remember that someone else has it worse. At my nine-day Mastery™ programs, I
invariably take a portion of one day to bring in people who've been through physical or emotional hell
and have come out on top—the W. Mitchells of the world, or my good friend Mique Davis, who, in his
drunken youth, decided to jump off a bridge but didn't realize the water was only about two feet deep.
He instantly became paralyzed from the neck down. These people begin to share from their hearts how
great life is, how happy they are to be alive, how much they've been able to accomplish. Or I bring in
my good friend Dax, who was trapped in a fire, had his entire body burned, and was blinded. Later, in
spite of all these challenges, he became a practicing attorney.
The theme for the day is to establish a simple and profound belief: "I have no problems." In contrast
with the brave individuals who share their stories, everyone else in the room knows they have no
challenges whatsoever. Suddenly, the problems they're having with their spouses, their children's
grades, the loss of a business, or their failure to achieve goals are immediately put into perspective.
We can also use new references to motivate ourselves if we start becoming complacent169. While it's
true that no matter how bad things are for you, someone else is going through something worse, it's
also true that no matter how well things are going for you, someone else is doing even better. Just
when you think your skill has reached the highest level, you find there's someone else who's achieved
even greater heights. And that's one of the beauties of life: it drives us to constantly expand and grow.
169

complacent selbstzufrieden, -gefällig
The power of having new references to raise our standards for ourselves is immense, whether it's
studying the teachings of a great spiritual leader who, in spite of abuse by others, continues to give
love, or seeing those who've succeeded financially and noticing what's truly possible. I'll never forget
the first time I met architect and hotel magnate Chris Hemmeter. Becky and I had the privilege of
being among the first people to be invited to visit Chris's new home, along with his family, in Hawaii—a
$70 million residence that is beyond verbal description. The front door alone cost $1 million to create.
While your rules may say, "That's an incredible waste of money," it was also an unbelievably
expanding experience of what is possible in terms of business or economic growth.
Suddenly, my $4 million Castle was put in perspective. It barely covered the cost of his front door and
marble stairway! Certainly there was room in my life for thinking bigger, pushing limits, imagining the
unimaginable. The best part of meeting Chris and his wife. Patsy, was discovering that they are
incredibly warm people, that they use their wealth to create an environment that truly inspires them.
Using contrasting references is one of the most powerful ways, then, to change our perceptions and
our feelings. If I ever start to lose perspective because I feel like I'm working too hard, I think about a
man who attended one of my seminars years ago. He was a warm and gentle soul who unfortunately
ended up in the wrong place at the wrong time. One day shy of his forty-fifth birthday he pulled into a
gas station where there were two men who had just that day been released from prison.
From their brief episode of freedom, these men had decided they weren't comfortable with life on the
outside, and they hit upon a plan to get back into prison: they'd kill the very next person who drove
into this gas station. It didn't matter who it was, what their age was, male or female; they'd just kill
the next human being. When this man drove up and got out of his car to fill his tank, they attacked
and brutally beat him to death.
Now, do you think you have problems? He left behind a wife and four small children. I was devastated
by the story; I couldn't believe it. How do you come out with a positive meaning from an experience
that seems to have none? I couldn't even imagine this happening to a member of my family and what
it would do to me. I kept asking myself what I could do to help. I immediately called his widow and
offered to help her in any way I could. My primary goal was to make sure that she was trying to find
some form of empowering meaning for herself and her children from this experience. It would have
been too easy to use this as a reference to back up a belief that life is not worth living, that humankind
is evil and destructive, that you can do everything right and still be mowed down like a blade of grass,
so why even try?
I communicated to this woman the importance for her children's sake of somehow finding in this
experience a shred of meaning to empower them at some level. When I asked her what this
experience could mean, she expressed how deep her pain was, but more important, the one thing
about this experience that was positive was that when the story was made known in the newspapers,
an unbelievable amount of love, support, and caring poured forth. She received literally hundreds of
letters and offers of support from people in the community, people from all walks of life. She said, "I
realized that if I believed that people were destructive or that this meant that life was unfair, I'd
destroy myself and my children.
So while it's unbelievably painful right now, I know that this must have happened for a reason. I don't
have a way to back it up; it is just my faith." This woman found the courage to use faith as the
ultimate reference. Her willingness to trust that there must be a reason, even if she's not aware of it,
freed her from the most painful experience of her life and empowered her.
What a powerful woman! How lucky these children are! She told them, "Kids, I want you to notice all
these people and how much love they are giving. People are really good. There are a few in the world
who are bad, and they need to be helped, but your daddy always believed in God, and now he has
gone to a better place. He had things to do while he was here, and his time was up, but our time is not
up, and we have to take advantage of it while we are here. We have to use your father's death to
remind us that every day we have to live life to its fullest. And we can't think about losing him,
because he will always be with us."
"It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye."
ANT0INE DE SAINT-EXUPERY
Could it be possible that what seem like the worst days in our lives are actually the most powerful in
terms of the lessons we can choose to learn from them? Think about one of the worst experiences that
has ever happened to you. As you look back upon it now, can you think of any ways in which it had
some kind of positive impact on your life? Maybe you were fired, or mugged, or involved in a car
accident, but out of that experience you gained a new resolve, or a new awareness that caused you to
grow as a person and measurably increased your ability to contribute.
I realize that some situations may be more challenging than others to find something good about, but
by this point in the book, you're no longer a novice. You've been stretching your imagination and
flexing your muscles of empowerment. You've learned how to manage your state and direct your focus
by asking better questions. If you were abused as a child, maybe it made you a more sensitive person
toward children and caused you to make the decision to break that generational chain of abuse; if you
grew up in a very restrictive environment, perhaps it drove you to fight for the freedom of others; if
you felt that you never were loved enough, you may now be a major giver. Or maybe just that
"horrible" event caused you to make new decisions, to change the direction of your life, and therefore
your destiny. Perhaps your worst days have really been your best.
You may protest, "No, Tony, there are some things in my past that have no purpose. I'll never get
over them; I'll always have pain." You're absolutely right: as long as you hold on to the belief that you
have been taken advantage of, or that you've lost something that can never be returned, you will
indeed always have that pain. Just remember, loss is imaginary. Nothing ever disappears in the
universe; it only changes form. If there is something that still wounds you, it's because of the meaning
that you have linked to it. Maybe what you need to do is to have faith and say, "Even though I don't
know why this has happened, I am willing to trust. Someday, when the time is right, I will
understand."
Limited references create a limited life. If you want to expand your life, you must expand your
references by pursuing ideas and experiences that wouldn't be a part of your life if you didn't
consciously seek them out. Remember, rarely does a good idea interrupt you; you must actively seek
it. Empowering ideas and experiences must be pursued.

A UNIVERSE OF IDEAS AND EXPERIENCES
In expanding our references, we create a great contrast with which to evaluate life and possibility. If
you've been magnifying your problems out of proportion, consider this: we live in a galaxy that
contains several hundred thousand million stars. Then realize that we live in a universe that has
several hundred thousand million galaxies. In other words, there are several hundred thousand million
suns in our galaxy alone. And all of these suns have planets revolving around them as well!
Think of the magnitude. The stars in our galaxy make one turn around the Milky Way's axis only once
every several hundred million years. When you think about the immensity of this universe, and then
look at the life span of an average human being (generously about eighty years), does it give you a
different perspective? The human life span is but a speck170 in time. And yet people worry themselves
to death about things like how they're going to pay the mortgage, what kind of car they drive,
or how their next business meeting will go.
"I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey-work of the stars."
WALT WHITMAN
I'm always trying to expand and improve my references because I believe in the old computer term
GIGO: Garbage In, Garbage Out. Each day that we live, we're taking in new information, ideas,
concepts, experiences, and sensations. We need to consciously stand guard at the doors of our minds
to make sure that whatever we're allowing to enter will cause our lives to be enriched, that the
experiences we pursue will add to our stockpile of possibility. In assisting our children to expand and
grow, we need to guide them into experiences that will provide positive references for their future—
references that will help them know they're capable of dealing with virtually anything.
Simultaneously, we need to teach them what to watch out for in life. Certain references denigrate our
experience of life. Are you a little bit concerned when you hear music like that of the Geto Boys? One
of their recent songs is a rap song about cutting a girl's throat and then having sex with her corpse. Do
you think this kind of reference repeated again and again, not just in children's minds, but in
anybody's, would be a little bit destructive? I'm not saying that someone's going to hear this and then
go out and do it; I'm just saying that it's trash. Does that mean I'm promoting censorship? Absolutely
not. I think one of the beauties of our country is freedom, but I think that you and I, as leaders, have
the right and responsibility to know what references mean and the impact they can have on the quality
of our lives.

170

speck kleiner Fleck, (Staub)Korn; Punkt (on the horizon am Horizont); !! nicht Speck
EXPAND YOUR REFERENCES AND EXPAND YOUR LIFE
We can always use whatever life has to offer in an empowering way, but we have to do it proactively.
The choices I have in my life come from a rich set of reference experiences that I have consciously
pursued on an ongoing basis. Each day I look for ways to expand. Into my thirty-one years I've packed
literally hundreds of years of experience. How can I say that? The number of challenging and enriching
experiences that I have in a month relates more closely to what most people experience over a
period of years.
One of the major ways I began to do this, starting at the age of seventeen, was through the rich
experiences that books provide. Early in my life, I developed the belief that leaders are readers. Books
could take me to other lands where I could meet unique people like Abraham Lincoln or Ralph Waldo
Emerson whom I could utilize as my personal coaches. I also knew that within the pages of books I
could find the answers to virtually any question I had. This breadth of references that hundreds of
books have given me has provided countless choices for how I can assist people. I pursued these
references because I realized that if I didn't feed my mind with the nourishment it craved, then I would
have to settle for the intellectual junk food that could be found in the nightly "sound bites" on
television news or through the opinions of the newspapers. If this is our major source of information,
then we can expect to get the same results as everyone else in society does.
The most powerful way to have a great understanding of life and people, to give ourselves the greatest
level of choice, is to expose ourselves to as many different types of references as possible. In my
youth, I was inspired to seek spiritual understanding when I realized that I'd attended only one church
and been exposed to only one religious philosophy for the majority of my life. In high school I received
a scholarship in journalism to attend a two-week program held at California Polytechnic State
University in San Luis Obispo. On that Sunday we were all given an assignment to write a story about
a church service.
As we began to walk through the community, deciding where we would go, I found myself gravitating
toward the church of my denomination171. But along the way, I heard several of my friends talking
about the Mormon Church we had just passed and how "horrible" those people were. It seemed to me
that people just aren't that deplorable172; I had to see what was going on. So I attended the service,
and saw that the Mormons loved God as much as I did. The only difference was that they had a few
rules that varied slightly from my own.
This started my spiritual odyssey, which developed into a personal ritual for almost a year and a half.
Throughout my eighteenth and nineteenth years, two or three times a month, I would attend a totally
different type of worship: Lutheran, Catholic, Baptist, Episcopalian, Methodist, Jewish, Buddhist, and so
on. As a result of this, I truly began to live at a more spiritual level where I began to appreciate all
people's spiritual beliefs. Even if I didn't subscribe to their particular rules or perceptions, I had a much
broader base of understanding and compassion as a result.

171
172

denomination RELIGION Konfession; VOLKSWIRTSCHAFT Nennwert
deplorable bedauerlich, beklagenswert
If you want to expand your life, go for it! Pursue some experiences that you've never had before. Go
scuba diving. Explore the undersea world, and find out what life's like and what you're like in a whole
new environment. Go skydiving. When you're sitting on the edge of a plane 12,500 feet in the air, and
you know you're going to fall for an entire minute at 120 miles an hour, to get yourself out of that
plane requires absolute faith. You don't know what faith is until you have this reference!
Go take that helicopter lesson. I assure you, it will change your life forever. Take four days and go to
racing school. You'll learn more about limits and possibility than you could imagine. Go spend an
evening at the symphony, if it's not something you usually do—or a rock conceit, if that's what you
habitually avoid. Expand your level of choice. One day, spontaneously, go by a children's hospital
during visiting hours. Go meet some strangers and tell some stories. The challenge to develop rapport
and find a way to touch others' lives will change you forever. Maybe it's time to immerse yourself in
another culture and see the world through others' eyes. Maybe it's time to visit Fiji and celebrate in
a kava ceremony with the locals. Or take part in a "ride along" program at your local police
department, where you sit in the back seat of a patrol car and see your community through an officer's
eyes.
Remember, if we want to understand and appreciate people, one of the most powerful ways is to share
some of their references. Perhaps it's time to go back to school, to explore the "inner universe" in the
form of biology or physiology, or understand our culture better through a study of sociology or
anthropology. Remember, any limits that you have in your life are probably just the result of limited
references. Expand your references, and you'll immediately expand your life.
While the possibilities I've touched on are exciting and inspiring, they are offered to get your juices
flowing. You don't have to do all of them—or any of them—in order to gain new references. You don't
have to go on safari in Africa; you can just go around the comer, and help a homeless person in your
own community discover resources of their own that they never knew existed. Whole worlds open up
with the addition of just one new reference. It could be one new thing you see or hear, a conversation
or a movie or a seminar, something you read on the very next page—you never know when it may
happen.
"The only way to discover the limits of the possible is to go beyond them into the impossible."
ARTHUR C. CLARKE
Now let's take inventory of some of the most powerful references that have shaped your life. Take a
moment now and write down five of the most powerful experiences that have shaped who you've
become as a person. Give not only a description of the experience, but how that experience impacted
you. If you write down anything that seems to have impacted you negatively, immediately come up
with another interpretation of that event, no matter what it takes. This may require some faith; it may
require a new perspective you never would have considered before. Remember, everything in life
happens for a reason and a purpose, and it serves us. Sometimes it takes years or decades for us to
find value. But there is value in all human experience.
As you review this list of all the events that have positively shaped your life, I want you to think about
some new references that would be very valuable for you to pursue. What are some new experiences
you need? A good question might be, "In order to really succeed at the highest level, to achieve what I
really want for my life, what are some references I need?" Maybe what you need to do is model
somebody who has really made their relationships work; find out what some of their beliefs are, what
some of their references are about what makes a relationship work. Or maybe you just need to seek
out references that make you appreciate life more or that make you feel like you are contributing.
Now think of some fun references to have. Maybe you don't "need" them, but think of some that would
be entertaining or would just make you feel good. I began to study martial arts because I knew what
an incredible set of states the discipline would provide. I earned my black belt in toe kwon do in eight
months by studying directly with the great Grandmaster Jhoon Rhee and modeling his incredibly
intense focus. I realized that if I could have the experience of disciplining myself so fiercely in that
area of my life, then that reference would spill over to many other areas—and it did. So, what else
could you do?
Once you've brainstormed a list of great references to acquire, put a time line and a date on each.
Decide when you are going to do every one. When are you going to learn to speak Spanish or Greek
or Japanese? When are you going to take that hot-air balloon ride? When are you going to go to the
local old folks' home and sing carols? When are you going to do something unusual and new?
What are some references you could provide for your family that would be invaluable? Maybe it is
taking your kids to the Smithsonian, maybe it is something as simple as sitting down and talking
about the references that the family has already shared, or getting together with some of the
grandparents and talking about their lives and what they have learned. What invaluable references
these sixty-, seventy-, eighty-,and ninety-plus year-olds have for those of us who are younger!
One of the most powerful references I have shared with my family is delivering Thanksgiving dinners
to those who cannot or will not visit shelters. I'll never forget my youngest son's reaction when he was
four years old. It was Jairek's first time participating, and we went to a park in Oceanside, California.
We found an old man who was sleeping on the floor of a bathroom with no doors, trying to cover
himself with old clothes he had found in trash cans. My son marveled at his very long beard and was a
little bit scared. I handed Jairek the basket of food and other survival goodies, and said, "Go on and
give it to this man, and wish him a Happy Thanksgiving." Jairek approached cautiously. As he went
into the bathroom with a basket that was as big as he was, he set it down gently. The man looked like
he was either drunk or asleep. Jairek touched the man and said, "Happy Thanksgiving!" All of a
sudden, the man bolted upright and grabbed my son's hand. My heart leaped into my throat, and just
as I started to spring forward, the man took Jairek's hand and kissed it. He whispered hoarsely173,
"Thank you for caring." Boy, what a reference for a four-year-old!
Remember, it's the moments of our lives that shape us. It's up to us to pursue and create the
moments that will lift us and not limit us. So now, get off the bench and step into the game of life. Let
your imagination run wild with the possibilities of all those things you could explore and experience—
and begin immediately. What new experience could you pursue today that would expand your life?
173

hoarse (hoarser, hoarsest) heiser, rau
What kind of person will you become? Take action and enjoy exploring the possibilities. Let's discover
the profound change that comes from…
18
IDENTITY: THE KEY TO EXPANSION

"Nothing great will ever be achieved without great men, and men are great only if they are determined
to be so."
CHARLES DE GAULLE

There were no marks on his body. The Chinese Communists had held him captive in a tiny room for
more than twenty hours, but they hadn't beaten or tortured him. They had even offered him a
cigarette or two . . . and as a result of their polite conversation, this GI now held a document in his
own handwriting detailing the countless injustices and destructiveness of the American way of life—the
capitalist society—and praising the superiority and ethical humanity of the Communist system. What's
more, the essay this officer of the U.S. Army had written was now being broadcast to his and other
POW camps in North Korea, as well as to the American forces stationed in South Korea. He would later
divulge military information, turn in his fellow prisoners, and fervently174 denounce his own country.
What caused this man to completely reverse his world-view and dismantle175 the beliefs that had been
instilled176 in him over a lifetime? What caused him to abandon the core values he'd previously held
and become a collaborator with the enemy? What single change would make such a radical shift in the
thoughts, emotions, and actions of an individual?
The answer lies in understanding that he was directed down a path that caused him to literally shift his
identity. He was now simply acting in accordance with his new image of himself.
Throughout this book you've explored with me the impact of beliefs, one of the foundational elements
in the Master System that directs all of our evaluations. Beliefs guide us to conclusions, and therefore
they teach us how to feel and what to do. However, there are different levels of beliefs that have
different levels of impact on the quality of our lives.
Some are very specific. For example, the beliefs you have about a particular friend will determine how
you think and feel about his behavior, and the meaning that you'll link to anything that he does. If you
"know" that he is loving, then even if he appears to be angry at the moment, you will not question his
ultimate intent. This belief will guide all of your interactions with this person. But this will not
necessarily affect the way you deal with a stranger. These beliefs impact you in only one specific
area of your life: your interactions with this friend.
Some beliefs, however, have an expanded influence on your life; I call these global beliefs. These are
the beliefs which have much further-reaching consequences. For example, the beliefs you have about

174
175
176

fervent glühend, leidenschaftlich
dismantle TECHNIK demontieren
instill Am. (-ll-) beibringen, einflößen (into Dativ)
people in general will affect not just the way you deal with your friend, but with everyone you meet.
These beliefs will powerfully impact your career, your level of trust, your marriage, and so forth.
The global beliefs you have about the concepts of scarcity and abundance, for example, will determine
your stress level and your generosity of time, money, energy, and spirit. If you believe we live in a
world with scarce177 resources—where there's only so much money, so much time, so much love—then
you'll constantly live in fear that you won't have enough. This stress will affect the way you think of
your neighbors, your co-workers, your financial capabilities, and opportunities in general.
More powerful than any of these, though, is the core belief that is the ultimate filter to all of our
perceptions. This belief directly controls the consistency of your life's decisions. These are the beliefs
you have about your identity.
What we can or cannot do, what we consider possible or impossible, is rarely a function of our true
capability. It is more likely a function of our beliefs about who we are. In fact, if you've ever found
yourself unable to even consider doing something, where your response to someone is, "I could never
do that" or "I'm just not that kind of person," then you've run up against the barriers of a limited
identity. This isn't always bad, of course. Not perceiving yourself as a murderer is a very important
distinction! Not perceiving yourself as someone who would take advantage of others is probably very
useful. It's important to realize that we define ourselves not only by who we are, but by who we are
not.
What exactly is identity? It is simply the beliefs that we use to define our own individuality, what
makes us unique—good, bad, or indifferent—from other individuals. And our sense of certainty about
who we are creates the boundaries and limits within which we live.
Your capability is constant, but how much of it you use depends upon the identity you have
for yourself. For example, if you feel certain that you are an outgoing, outrageous person, you'll tap
the resources of behavior that match your identity. Whether you see yourself as a "wimp" or a "wild
man," a "winner" or a "wallflower," will instantly shape which capabilities you access. You may have
read the book Pygmalion in the Classroom, which details the dramatic change in students performance
when they become convinced that they are gifted.
Time and again, researchers have shown that students' capabilities are powerfully impacted by the
identities they develop for themselves as the result of teachers' belief in their level of intelligence. In
one study, a group of teachers were told that certain students in their classes were truly gifted and to
make sure that they challenged them to continue to expand. As can be expected, these children
became the top achievers in their class. What makes this study significant is that these students had
not actually demonstrated higher levels of intelligence—and, in fact, some had previously been labeled
poor students. Yet it was their sense of certainty that they were superior (which had been instilled I
by a teacher's "false belief) that triggered their success.
The impact of this principle is not limited to students. The kind oft person other people perceive you to
be controls their responses to you. Often this has nothing to do with your true character. For example,
if a person sees you as a crook178, even if you're an honest person and do good things, this person will

177
178

scarce (scarcer, scarcest) knapp (Ware); selten
crook 1. Krümmung; Hirtenstab; umgangssprachlich: Gauner; 2. (sich) krümmen oder biegen
search for the sinister179 motive behind your acts. What's worse is that, after making a positive change,
we often allow others in our environment who have not changed their image of us to anchor our own
emotions and beliefs back into our old behaviors and identities. We all need to remember that we have
tremendous power to influence the identities of those we care about most.
This is the power that Marva Collins commands when she influences her students to believe that they
are the masters of their destinies, that they are as talented as any human being who has walked on
earth.
"The best effect of fine persons is felt after we have left their presence."
RALPH WALDO EMERSON
We all will act consistently with our views of who we truly are, whether that view is accurate or not.
The reason is that one of the strongest forces in the human organism is the need for consistency.
Throughout our lives, we've been socialized to link massive pain to inconsistency and pleasure to being
consistent. Think about it. What labels do we attach to people who say one thing and then do another,
who claim to be one way and then behave another? We call them hypocritical, fickle, unstable,
unreliable, wishy-washy, scatterbrained, flaky, untrustworthy. Would you like to have these labels
attached to you?
Would you even like to think of yourself in this way? The answer is obvious: a resounding no! As a
result, whenever we take a stand— especially a public stand—and state what we believe, who we are,
or what we're about, we experience intense pressure to remain consistent with that stand, regardless
of what that inflexibility may cost us in the future.
Conversely, there are tremendous rewards for remaining consistent with our stated identities. What do
we call people who are consistent? We use words like trustworthy, loyal, steady, solid, intelligent,
stable, rational, true-blue. How would you like to have people consistently use these labels to describe
you? How would it feel to think of yourself in this way? Again, the answer is obvious: most people
would love it. Thus, the need to remain consistent becomes irrevocably tied to your ability to avoid
pain and gain pleasure.
"A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin180 of small minds."
RALPH WALDO EMERSON
The Pygmalion effect also works in reverse. If you feel certain that you are "learning-disabled," it
becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. This is quite different from believing that your current strategy for
learning is ineffective. The ability to change one's strategy is perceived by most of us to be a simple
and achievable task, as long as we have the right teacher.

179
180

sinister finster, unheimlich
hobgoblin Kobold männlich
However, changing ourselves—changing the essence of who we are—is perceived by most to be next
to impossible. The common response, "I'm just this way," is a phrase that murders dreams. It
carries with it the sentence of an unchangeable and permanent problem.
A person who believes they have developed a drug addiction can clearly change. It will be difficult, but
a change can be made, and it can last. Conversely, a person who believes himself to be a drug addict
will usually return to the use of drugs even after weeks or months of abstinence. Why? It's because he
believes that this is who he 15. He doesn't have a drug addiction; he is a drug addict. Remember from
Chapter 4 that once a person has a conviction about anything, he will ignore and even defend against
any evidence that's contrary to his belief. Unconsciously, this person will not believe that he can
change long-term, and this will control his behavior.
In addition, there's often a secondary gain involved in the process of maintaining this negative
behavior. After all, this man can blame his addiction on something he can't control—it's simply "who he
is"—instead of facing the reality that taking drugs is a conscious decision. This will be augmented by
the need within the human nervous system for consistency, and he will return to this destructive
pattern again and again. Surrendering his identity would be even more painful than the clearly
destructive effects of the drugs themselves.
Why? Because we all have a need for a sense of certainty. Most people have tremendous fear of the
unknown. Uncertainty implies the potential of having pain strike us, and we'd rather deal with the
pain we already know about than deal with the pain of the unknown. Thus, living in an ever-changing
world—one in which we are constantly surrounded by the flux of new relationships, redefined job roles,
changing environments, and a steady stream of new information—the one thing that we all count on to
be constant is our sense of identity. If we begin to question who we are, then there is no foundation
for all of the understandings upon which we've built our lives.
If you don't know who you are, then how can you decide what to do? How can you formulate values,
adopt beliefs, or establish rules? How can you judge whether something is good, bad, or indifferent?
The biggest challenge for someone who perceives his identity as a drug addict is: what does he change
his identity to? To a "recovering drug addict"? This doesn't change his identity; it merely describes the
state he's in currently.
"Drug-free" doesn't do it either, because most see it as a temporary state—and it still focuses on drugs
as one of the ways of defining oneself. When this person develops the conviction that he is absolutely
clean, that he's now a "Christian," "Muslim," "Jew," or "Buddhist," or now that he's a "leader"—or
anything else other than a "drug addict"—that's when his behavior changes. As we develop new beliefs
about who we are, our behavior will change to support the new identity.
The same thing happens with a person who has excess weight whose identity is, "I'm a fat person."
This individual may diet and lose weight in the short term, but he will always gain it back because his
sense of certainty about who he is will guide all his behaviors until they are once again consistent with
his identity. We all must maintain the integrity of our convictions of who we are, even when they are
destructive and disempowering.
The only way to create lasting change for an individual who's been using drugs is to change his
conviction from "I am a drug addict" to "I'm a health nut" or "I'm a living example that no problem is
permanent" or "Now I'm

." Whatever the new identity, it must be one that would never even

consider the use of drugs. If drugs are offered again, his immediate response is not to evaluate
whether he should use them or not, but to simply state with absolute certainty, "I'm not that kind of
person. That's who I used to be."
Those with excess weight must transform their identity from a fat person to a vital, healthy, and
athletic human being. This identity change will shift all their behaviors, from their diet to their exercise,
and allow them to create the long-term physiological changes that are consistent with their new
identity. This shift may sound like it's merely a semantic manipulation, but in truth it is a much deeper
and more profound transformation of personal reality.
In fact, one shift in identity can cause a shift of your entire Master System. Think about it. Doesn't a
drug addict have a completely different system of evaluation—the states he consistently experiences,
the questions he asks, the values that guide his actions, and the references he organizes into beliefs—
than does someone who considers himself to be a leader, a lover, an athlete, or a contributor? While
it's true that not all identity shifts are as complete as others, some are indeed so far reaching that one
Master System is literally replaced in a moment by another.
If you've repeatedly attempted to make a particular change in your life, only to continually fall short,
invariably the challenge is that you were trying to create a behavioral or emotional shift that was
inconsistent with your belief about who you are. Shifting, changing, or expanding identity can produce
the most profound and rapid improvements in the quality of your life.

HOW YOUR IDENTITY IS FORMED
Why is it that during the Korean War more American POWs informed on their fellow prisoners than in
any other war in modem history? The answer is that the Chinese Communists, unlike their allies, the
North Koreans, understood the power of identity to instantaneously change not only their long-held
beliefs and values, but their actions, in an instant. Rather than brutalize the prisoners, they
doggedly181 pursued their own ingenious form of psychological warfare182 designed not merely to
extract information or create compliance, but rather to convert the American fighting man to their
political philosophy. They knew that if they could lead him into a new set of beliefs and values, then he
would see his country's role in the war as futile183 and destructive, and therefore assist them in any
way they requested. And they succeeded. Understanding what they did can help you understand how
you've arrived at your current identity and how you can expand your identity, and therefore your
entire life, in a matter of moments.
The task before the Chinese Communists was formidable indeed. How can you change someone's
entire identity without the threat of death or the promise of freedom? Especially knowing that the
American soldier has been trained to give only his name, rank, and serial number?

181
182
183

dogged verbissen, hartnäckig
warfare Krieg(führung weiblich) männlich
futile nutz-, zwecklos
Their plan was very simple: start small, and build. The Chinese understood that the way we identify
anyone is by their actions. For example, how do you know who your friend really is? Isn't it by the way
he or she acts, the way he or she treats people?
The Communists' real secret, though, was that they understood that we determine who we are—our
own identities—by judging our own actions as well. In other words, we look at what we do to
determine who we are. The Chinese realized that in order to achieve their broader objective of
changing the prisoner's beliefs about his identity, all they had to do was get the prisoner to do things
that a collaborator or a Communist would do.
Again, this is not a simple task, but they realized it could be done if they simply could wear the
American POW down through conversation that lasted twelve to twenty hours, and then make a minor
request: get him to say something like "The United States is not perfect" or "It's true in a Communist
country that unemployment is not a problem." Having established this footing, the Chinese would
simply start small and build.
They understood our need for consistency. Once we make a statement that we say we believe, we
have to be willing to back it up. They would merely ask the POW to write down some of the ways in
which America is not perfect. In his exhausted state, the GI was then asked, "What other social
benefits are there to communism?" Within a short period of time, the GI would have sitting in front of
him a document not only attacking his own nation, but also promoting Communism with all the
reasons written in his own handwriting. He now had to justify to himself why he'd done this. He'd not
been beaten, nor had he been offered special rewards. He'd simply made small statements in his need
to stay consistent with the ones he'd already written, and now he'd even signed the document. How
could he explain his "willingness" to do this? Later he would be asked to read his list in a discussion
group with other prisoners or even to write an entire essay about it.
When the Chinese broadcast these essays, along with the names of the prisoners who had written
them, suddenly the prisoner would find himself publicly identified as an enemy "collaborator." When
fellow prisoners asked him why he did it, he couldn't defend himself by saying he'd been tortured. He
had to justify his acts to himself in order to maintain his own sense of integrity. In an instant, he would
state that he wrote it because it was true! In that moment, his identity shifted. He now perceived
himself as pro-Communist, and all those around him also labeled him as such. They would reinforce his
new identity by treating him the same way they treated the Communist guards.
Soon his new identity would cause him to openly denounce his country and, in order to maintain
consistency between his statements and his new label, he would often collaborate even more
extensively with his captors. This was one of the most brilliant facets of the Chinese strategy: once a
prisoner had written something down, he couldn't later pretend to himself that it had never happened.
There it was in black and white, in his own handwriting, for anyone to see—something which drove him
"to make his beliefs and his self-image consistent with what he had undeniably done."
Before we judge our POWs harshly, however, we should take a good look at ourselves. Did you
consciously choose your identity, or is it the result of what other people have told you, significant
events in your life, and other factors that occurred without your awareness or approval?
What consistent behaviors have you adopted that now help to form the basis of your identity? Would
you be willing to undergo a painful bone-marrow extraction to help a stranger? Most people's first
response would be, "Absolutely not!" Yet in a study done in 1970, researchers found that if a person
was led to believe that the consistency of their identity relied upon it, many would commit to just such
a selfless act.
The study showed that when the subjects were asked to make small commitments first, and followed
up with two simple acts which made not volunteering seem "out of character," many began to develop
a new identity. They began to see themselves as "donors," as a person who unconditionally commits to
help those in need through personal sacrifice. Once this occurred, when the request for the bone
marrow was made, these people felt compelled by the force of their new identity to follow through
regardless of the time, money, or physical pain involved.
Their view of themselves as donors became a reflection of who they were. There is no more potent
leverage in shaping human behavior than identity.
You might ask, "Isn't my identity limited by my experience?" No, it's limited by your interpretation of
your experience. Your identity is nothing but the decisions you've made about who you are, what
you've decided to fuse yourself with. You become the labels you've given yourself. The way you define
your identity defines your life.

THE ULTIMATE PAIN—SEEDS OF AN IDENTITY CRISIS
People who act inconsistently with who they believe they are set the stage for the societal cliche of an
"identity crisis." When the crisis hits, they are immediately disoriented, questioning their previous
convictions. Their whole world is turned upside down, and they experience an intense fear of pain. This
is what happens to so many people having a "midlife crisis."
Often these people identify themselves as being young, and some environmental stimulant—turning a
certain age, comments from friends, graying hair—causes them to dread184 their approaching years
and the new, less desirable identity that they expect to experience with it. Thus, in a desperate effort
to maintain their identity, they do things to prove they're still young: buy fast cars, change their
hairstyles, divorce their spouses, change jobs.
If these people had a solid grasp of their true identities, would they experience this crisis at all? I
suspect not. Having an identity that is specifically linked to your age or how you look would definitely
set you up for pain because these things will change. If we have a broader sense of who we are, our
identity never becomes threatened.
Even businesses can have identity crises. Years ago, photocopying giant Xerox Corporation underwent
an interesting shift in its image. When personal computing emerged as "the wave of the future," Xerox
wanted to use their technological power to enter this exciting new market. They put their research and
development staff on it and, after spending approximately $2 billion, they came up with a number of
innovative advances, including the precursor to what we now call a "mouse."
184

dread 1. (große) Angst, Furcht; 2. (sich) fürchten
Why, then, isn't Xerox in the competitive computer race, running neck and neck with Apple and IBM?
One reason surely is that in the beginning, its identity didn't really allow for the company to head in
this direction. Even its "graphic" identity, which used a roly-poly monk, confined its capacity to be
identified as the epitome of cutting-edge computing technology. While the monk symbolized the
exacting nature of manuscript copying, he was hardly appropriate for this new venture into high
technology, where speed was one of the most highly valued criteria. On the consumer side, the
identity Xerox had established as the world's leading copier company did not instill a high confidence in
the company's efforts to market computers. Compound this with a graphic identity that had little to do
with how to process information rapidly, and you begin to see where some of Xerox's problems
originated.
Marketing and graphic-design experts alike will tell you that corporate image is a huge filter through
which consumers process buying information—they must know who you are, what you stand for, and
when they're investing large sums of money, they usually want to buy from a company that
exemplifies185 their product. As Xerox grappled with incorporating this facet of computerization into its
existing identity, other companies zoomed to the forefront, overtaking the marketplace. At this point,
Xerox decided that, rather than try to change its identity, it would utilize it. It would computerize its
photocopiers and concentrate its R & D dollars on improving what it already knew how to do best.
Today, Xerox is beginning the process of transformation by producing new "Xerox images"—airing
commercials featuring fast-paced imagery of plotters, hardware, software, communication networks—
and completing the visual message with the words, "Xerox ... the Document Company." This expanded
identity must be conditioned within the culture for Xerox to expand its market, and it is using every
opportunity to do so.
"When written in Chinese, the word 'crisis' is composed of two characters—one represents danger, and
the other represents opportunity."
JOHN F. KENNEDY
It doesn't take a crisis for most of us to understand that we can change our behavior, but the prospect
of changing our identity seems threatening or impossible to most. Breaking away from our core beliefs
about who we are gives us the most intense pain, and some people would even go so far as to kill
themselves to preserve those beliefs. This was dramatically illustrated in Victor Hugo's masterpiece Les
Miserables. When the hero Jean Valjean is released from his prison work crew, he is frustrated and
alone. Although in the many years he's spent in the custody of the French police he has never
accepted his label of "criminal" (he'd merely stolen a loaf of bread to feed his starving family and was
sentenced to many years of hard labor), once released, he discovers that he can't get an honest day's
work. He is scorned and rebuffed because of his status as an ex-convict.
Finally, in a state of helplessness, he begins to accept the identity that his societal label has imposed.
He now is a criminal and begins to act as such. In fact, when a kind priest takes him in, feeds him, and

185

exemplify veranschaulichen
gives him shelter for the night, he fulfills his criminal identity by stealing his benefactor's humble186
silver setting. When the police stop Valjean on a routine check, they discover not only that he is an exconvict, but also that he is carrying the priest's most valuable possessions—a crime punishable by a
life of hard labor.
Valjean is brought back to face the priest, and upon presentation of the facts, the priest insists that
the silver was a gift and reminds Valjean that he's forgotten the two remaining silver candlesticks. To
Valjean's further surprise, the priest subsequently makes his generous falsehood187 a truth and sends
him away with the silver to start a new life.
Valjean has to deal with the priest's actions. Why would he believe in him? Why didn't he send him
away in chains? The priest told him that he was his brother, that Valjean no longer belonged to evil,
that he was an honest man and a child of God. This massive pattern interrupt changes Valjean's
identity. He tears up his prison papers, moves to another city, and assumes a new identity. As he does,
all of his behaviors change. He becomes a leader and helps those in his community.
However, a policemen, Monsieur Javert, makes it his life's crusade188 to find Valjean and bring him to
justice. He "knows" Valjean is evil and defines himself as one who brings evil to justice. When Javert
finally catches up with him, Valjean has the opportunity to eliminate his nemesis—but he
magnanimously189 spares his life. After a lifetime of pursuit, Javert discovers that Valjean is a good
man—perhaps a better man than he—and he cannot deal with the potential of realizing that maybe he
was the one who was cruel and evil. As a result, he throws himself into the rapids of the river Seine.
"His supreme agony190 was the disappearance of certainty, and he felt himself uprooted191.. . Oh! what
a frightful thing! The man projectile, no longer knowing his road, and recoiling192!"
VICTOR HUGO, LES MISERABLES

WHO ARE YOU, ANYWAY?
What does all of this really mean? This can all seem very esoteric unless we start to actually define
ourselves. So take a moment to identify who you are. Who are you? There are so many ways in which
we define ourselves. We may describe ourselves as our emotions (I'm a lover, I'm peaceful, I'm
intense), our professions (I'm an attorney, I'm a doctor, I'm a priest), our tides (I'm Executive VicePresident), our incomes (I'm a millionaire), our roles (I'm a mother, I'm the eldest of five girls), our
behaviors (I'm a gambler), our possessions (I'm a "Beemer" owner), our metaphors (I'm king of the
hill, I'm low man on the totem pole), our feedback (I'm worthless, I'm special), our spiritual beliefs

186
187
188
189
190
191
192

humble 1. (humbler, humblest) demütig; bescheiden; 2. demütigen
falsehood Falschheit weiblich; Unwahrheit weiblich
crusade Kreuzzug
magnanimous großmütig, hochherzig
agony Qual; Todeskampf
uproot ausreißen, entwurzeln; übertragen jemanden herausreißen (from aus)
recoil 1. zurückschrecken (from vor Dativ); 2. Rückstoß
(I'm Jewish), our looks (I'm beautiful, I'm ugly, I'm old), our accomplishments (I'm the 1960 Spring
Valley High Homecoming Queen), our past (I'm a failure), and even what we're not (I'm not a quitter).
The identity that our friends and peers have tends to affect us as well. Take a good look at your friends.
Who you believe they are is often a reflection of who you believe you are. If your friends are very
loving and sensitive, there's a great chance that you see yourself in a similar vein193. The time frame
you use to define your identity is very powerful as well. Do you look to your past, your present, or the
future to define who you truly are? Years ago my present and past weren't terribly exciting, so I
consciously fused194 my identity with the vision I had of who I knew I would become. I didn't have to
wait; I began to live as this man now.
It's very important, when you are answering this question, to be in the right state. You need to feel
relaxed, safe, and curious. If you're just powering through this book, scanning and reading rapidly, or
if you have many distractions, you're not going to get the answers you need. Take a nice, deep breath
in; relax the breath out. Let your mind be curious—not fearful, not concerned, not looking for
perfection or for anything in particular. Just ask yourself, "Who am I?" Write down the answer, and
then ask it again. Each time you ask it, write down whatever surfaces, and keep probing deeper and
deeper. Continue to ask until you find the description of yourself that you have the strongest
conviction about. How do you define yourself? What is the essence of who you are? What metaphors
do you use to describe yourself? What roles do you play?
Often, if you don't create this safe and curious state, all of the fears and hesitations about identity will
keep giving you inadequate answers. In fact, often if you just ask this question up front of somebody,
blurting out, "Who are you?" without putting them in the right state, you'll get one of two responses:
1) A blank stare. This type of question throws many people into a tailspin because they have never
been called upon to seriously ponder what their answer is.
2) A surface-level answer. This is a first-attempt evasion technique. This response can be defined as
the "Popeye Principle," where a person will simply insist, "I am what I am, and that's all that I am."
Often, what I find is that when you ask someone a question, especially an emotional one, they won't
answer you until they've answered two questions of their own.
First they ask themselves, "Can I answer this question?" If a person's not sure who he is, often he'll
say, "I don't know" or give you the first surface answer. Sometimes people are afraid to ask the
question for fear of realizing that they lack clarity in this critical area of their lives. And the second
question they ask themselves before answering is: "What's in it for me? If I answer this question, how
will this benefit me personally?"
Let me offer you the answer to these two questions. First, you do know who you are. Yes, you can
come up with the answer if you take a moment to brainstorm a bit right now. But you've got to trust
yourself to let whatever answers come out of you just flow, and write them down. Second, the benefit
to knowing who you are is the ability to instantaneously shape all of your behaviors. If you take the
time to get in the right state, you'll come up with . . .
A thoughtful answer. I hope this is the kind of answer you're searching for right now!

193
194

vein Vene, Ader (auch BOTANIK, GEOLOGIE, übertragen); übertragen (Charakter)Zug; übertragen Stimmung
fuse 1. Zünder; ELEKTROTECHNIK Sicherung; Zündschnur; 2. schmelzen; ELEKTROTECHNIK durchbrennen
"I think, therefore I am."
RENE DESCARTES
So take a moment right now to answer a question pondered195 by philosophers through the ages, from
Socrates to Sartre. Put yourself in that safe, curious state. Take a deep breath and release it. Ask,
"Who am I?"
I AM..
To assist you in defining yourself, remember that identity is simply what distinguishes you from
everyone else. Here are a couple of exercises I think you will enjoy.
1) If you were to look in the dictionary under your name, what would it say? Would three words just
about cover it, or would your epic narrative consume page after page, or demand a volume of its own?
Right now, write down the definition you would find if you were to look up your name in a dictionary.

MY DICTIONARY DEFINITION

Take a moment, and let your answers sink in. When you're ready, move to the next exercise.
2) If you were to create an ID card that would represent who you truly are, what would be on it—and
what would you leave off? Would it include a picture or not? Would you list your vital statistics? Your
physical description? Your accomplishments? Your emotions? Your beliefs? Your affiliations? Your
aspirations? Your motto? Your abilities? Take a moment to describe what would be on this identity card
and what would be left off in order to show someone who you really are.

MY ID CARD

Now, take a look at what you've written down, at the descriptions you have of your identity—in
essence, the story of your life. How do you feel about it? I hope you're taking a moment right now to
really appreciate who you are, to feel the deep emotion that comes with recognition.
If you're noticing that your identity creates pain, know that whatever you call your identity is simply
what you've decided to identify with, and that in a moment you could change it all. You have the

195

ponder nachdenken (on, over über Akkusativ); überlegen, nachdenken über (Akkusativ)
power within you right now. In fact, after looking at how identities evolve, you'll have an opportunity
to expand your identity, and therefore your entire life.

EVOLUTION OF AN IDENTITY
One of my friends, a woman named Debra whom everyone knows as adventurous and vibrant,
recently shared with me a story about the transformation she had undergone with her identity. "When
I was growing up," she said, "I was always a wimp. I wouldn't do anything physical, or anything that
had any potential of my getting hurt." After attending some of my seminars and having new
experiences (scuba diving, firewalking, and skydiving), she began to see that she could do these
things—if she forced herself. But these references were not yet organized into a new belief about who
she is. She now merely saw herself as "a wimp who'd skydived." The transformation had not yet taken
place, but unbeknownst to her, it had been set in motion. She reports that other people were envious
of her accomplishments, saying things like, "I wish I had the guts to do what you did. You're so
adventurous!" She was genuinely taken by surprise by their comments, but the continuous view that
others had of her began to cause her to question her view of herself.
"Finally," Debra said, "I began to link pain to the idea of being a wimp. I knew my belief about being
wimpy was limiting me, so I decided that was not who I wanted to be anymore." Not only that, but all
this time her psyche had been wrestling with the incongruity between how her friends viewed her and
how she perceived her own identity. So when she had another chance to go skydiving, she seized upon
it as an opportunity to make the leap from potentiality to actuality, from "what could be" to "what is."
It was time to boost her "adventurous" identity from opinion to conviction.
As the plane climbed to an altitude of 12,500 feet, Debra watched the less experienced members of
her skydiving team struggle to contain their fear and look like they were having fun. She thought to
herself, "That's who I used to be, but I'm not that person anymore. Today, I'm going to have fun!" She
used their apprehension196 as contrast with the new person she had decided to become. She thought
to herself, "That's how I used to respond"—and was startled to realize that she had just made a major
shift. She was no longer a wimp, but an adventurous, powerful woman about to have the time of her
life.
She was the first jumper to leave the plane, and all the way down she whooped with delight, joy, and
exhilaration. She had never before felt such intense levels of pure physical energy and excitement.
One key element that may have pushed her over the edge in instantly adopting her new identity was
her deep level of commitment to setting an example for the other jumpers in her role as team leader.
She told me, "It's like what you do. Tony. If you did a whole seminar about breaking through fear and
limitation, but refused to do the Firewalk, it just wouldn't work. You have to walk your talk."
Debra's transformation was complete. She gained new references that started to chip away at her old
identity, made a decision to identify with greater possibilities, and when the right moment came,
contrasted her new identity with what she no longer wanted to be. This was the final leverage she
196

apprehension Ergreifung, Festnahme; Besorgnis
needed to bring about the transformation. Her evolution was simple yet powerful. This complete
identity change now impacts her kids, her business, and everything else she's involved in. Today, she's
truly an adventurous leader.
Of course, you can always decide to redefine yourself. Think of the wondrous imagination that
suffuses197 the heart and soul of every child. One day he's Zorro, the masked avenger. The next he's
Hercules, the Olympian hero. And today, he's Grandpa, his own real-life hero. Identity shifts can be
among the most joyous, magical and liberating experiences of life. Why do adults look forward all year
to Halloween or New Orleans's Mardi Gras? One reason, I'm sure, is that these celebrations give us
permission to step outside ourselves and assume an alter ego. We may do things in these new
identities that we wouldn't normally do; we may do things we want to do all the time but see as
inconsistent with our identities.
The reality is that we could do this any day of the year! We could completely redefine ourselves, or we
could simply decide to let our "real selves" shine through. Like mild-mannered Clark Kent shedding his
spectacles and business suit to reveal the mighty Superman, we may uncover a giant identity that is
more than our behaviors, more than our past, more than any label we've been giving ourselves.

THE POWER TO reinvent YOURSELF
Now, let's expand!
If your identity isn't everything you want it to be, then make it that way. Start by taking the following
four steps to reinvent yourself.
1. Make a list right now of all the elements of your identity you want to have. As you make the list,
revel in the power you have right now to change simply by deciding to. Who are some people who
have these characteristics you aspire to having? Can they serve as role models? Imagine yourself
fusing with this new identity.
Imagine how you'd breathe. How would you walk? How would you talk? How would you think? How
would you feel?
2. If you'd truly like to expand your identity and your life, then, right now, consciously decide who you
want to be. Get excited, be like a kid again, and describe in detail who you've decided you are today.
Take a moment now to write down your expanded list.
3. Now develop a plan of action you could take that would cause you to know that you're truly living
consistently with your new identity. In developing this plan, pay special attention to the friends you're
choosing to spend time with. Will they reinforce or destroy the identity you're creating?
There's nothing quite as pleasurable as seeing someone expand their identity. One of the greatest joys
I've experienced in recent years was watching the transformation of my eldest son, Tyier, as he went
from a neophyte interested in flying helicopters with me, to a master jet pilot, to a commercial
helicopter pilot. What a change in self-esteem as he began to realize that he'd become one of the few
197

suffuse durchfluten (Licht); überziehen (Röte und so weiter)
who do versus the many who talk—that he had mastered the skies and created for himself the
unlimited freedom that few would ever hope to experience!
4. The final step is to commit to your new identity by broadcasting it to everyone around you. The
most important broadcast, however, is to yourself. Use your new label to describe yourself every
single day, and it will become conditioned within you.

THE FUTURE OF YOUR IDENTITY
Even after completing this exercise, you'll want to continue to refine your identity, expand it, or create
better rules for it. We live in a dynamic world where our identities must continually expand in order to
enjoy a greater quality of life. You need to become aware of things that may influence your identity,
notice whether they are empowering or disempowering you, and take control of the whole process.
Otherwise you become a prisoner of your own past. I'm curious: Are you now the same person you
were when you picked up this book?
I am continually redefining myself, and people often wonder at my level of confidence in pursuing new
ventures. I'm often asked, "How have you accomplished so much in your life?" I think that a big part
of it is that I look at things in a different way than most: while most people have to establish
competence before they feel confident, I decide to feel confident, and that provides the sense of
certainty to persist until I am competent. That's why my identity is not limited by my past references.
If you were to ask me who I am today (and I might decide to change tomorrow!), I would say that I
am a creator of possibility, an instigator of joy, a catalyst for growth, a builder of people, and a
producer of passion. I am not a motivator, a preacher, or a guru. I am one of the nation's experts in
the psychology of change. I am a coach, an entrepreneur, a husband, a father, a lover, a friend, an
entertainer, a television personality, a nationally best-selling author, one of the most impactful
speakers in the nation, a black belt, a jet helicopter pilot, an international businessman, a health
expert, an advocate for the homeless, a philanthropist, a teacher, a person who makes a difference, a
force for good, a healer, a challenger . . . and a fun, outrageous, and humble kind o' guy!
I identity with the highest elements of my self, and I view those facets of me that are not yet perfect
as an opportunity for growth rather than as character flaws. You and I need to expand our view of who
we are. We need to make certain that the labels we put upon ourselves are not limits but
enhancements, that we add to all that's already good within us—for whatever you and I begin to
identify with, we will become. This is the power of belief.
"If we all did the things we are capable of doing, we would literally astound ourselves."
THOMAS A. EDISON
Because of my commitment to constantly expand my capacity to appreciate all aspects of life, I'm
always pursuing unique references. Years ago, I decided to visit the Bellevue morgue198, and I
198

morgue Leichenschauhaus; umgangssprachlich: (Zeitungs)Archiv
experienced a major life transformation. I went there because my friend. Dr. Fred Covan, who is Chief
Psychologist of Bellevue Hospital in New York, convinced me that in order to understand life you've got
to understand death. Becky and I arrived at his office with a great deal of apprehension. Fred sat us
down and cautioned us not to say a word during the experience. "Just let it happen," he said. "Notice
what feelings come up, and then we'll talk about it later."
Not knowing what to expect, we nervously followed the doctor as he descended the stairs. He led us to
the section for unclaimed bodies, where most of the remains were from the indigent199 street
population. As he pulled out the first metal drawer and unzipped the body bag, I felt a shudder200
ripple201 through my body. Here was this "person" there with me, yet I was instantly struck by the
feeling of emptiness. Becky was shaken when she thought she saw the body move. Fred later pointed
out that Becky's experience was common, that we all have a difficult time dealing with bodies that
don't move, that are devoid of the pulse of life.
As he opened each successive drawer, the emotion hit me again and again: there's no one here. The
body is here, but there is no person. Moments after death, these people weighed the same amount as
they did when they were alive, but whatever they were—the essence of who they truly were—was no
longer there. We are not our bodies. When we pass on, there's no question that what's missing is the
intangible, weightless identity, that essence of life some call spirit. I believe that it's equally important
for us to remember that while we're alive, we're not our bodies.
Neither are we our past, nor our behaviors in the moment. This experience gave me an incredible
sense of gratitude for the blessed gift of life. Suddenly I looked at people who had major physical
challenges and thought, "Boy, do they look healthy." There's nothing like a little contrast to remind us
of how fortunate we all are! Recently, my feelings were put into words when I had the opportunity to
visit with author Wayne Dyer. He said something that day that typifies my feelings. He told me, "We
are not human beings having a spiritual experience. We are spiritual beings having a human
experience."
Our identity is the cornerstone of that experience. I believe that our true identity is something that's
indefinable and greater than anything that's describable. We are soul; we are spirit. Remembering who
we really are puts everything into perspective, doesn't it? Once we act with the knowledge that we're
spiritual beings, we won't get caught up in all the little games that separate us from one another. We'll
know with deep conviction that we are truly connected with all of creation.
"Each of us inevitable; Each of us limitless—each of us with his or her right upon the earth; Each of us
allow'd the eternal purports of the earth; Each of us here as divinely202 as any is here."
WALT WHITMAN
The next time you catch yourself saying, "I could never do that," or "That's just not me," take a
moment to consider the impact of what you're saying. Have you limited your concept of self? If so,

199
200
201
202

indigent arm
shudder 1. schaudern; 2. Schauder
ripple 1. (sich) kräuseln; plätschern, rieseln; 2. kleine Welle; Kräuselung; Plätschern, Rieseln
divine (diviner, divinest) göttlich
take advantage of every opportunity to expand your identity. Get yourself to do those things you don't
think you can do, and use your new actions as a reference that gives you a sense of certainty that
you're more than you thought.
Begin to ask yourself, "What more can I be? What more will I be? Who am I becoming now?" Think
about your values and dream list, and commit to yourself that, regardless of the environment, "I will
consistently act as a person who is already achieving these goals. I will breathe this way. I will move
this way. I will respond to people this way. I will treat people with the kind of dignity, respect,
compassion, and love that this person would." If we decide to think, feel, and act as the kind of person
we want to be, we will become that person. We won't just be behaving "like" that person; we will be
that person.
You are now at a crossroads. This is your opportunity to make the most important decision you will
ever make. Forget your past. Who are you now? Who have you decided you really are now? Don't
think about who you have been. Who are you now? Who have you decided to become?
Make this decision consciously. Make it carefully. Make it powerfully. As we now leave our study of the
Master System, just remember this: you don't have to make all of the changes we've talked about
here in order to transform the quality of your life. If you change any one of the five areas of the
system, your whole life will change. A change in your habitual questions alone will change your focus
and change your life. Making shifts in your values hierarchies will immediately change the direction of
your life. Cultivating powerful, resourceful states in your physiology will change the way you think and
the way you feel. This alone could change your identity. So could changing some of your global beliefs.
Pursuing additional references will provide the raw materials for assembling a new experience of who
you are. And certainly, deciding to expand your identity could transform virtually everything. I know
that you'll want to return to these pages again and again throughout your life as you begin to reinvent
yourself and define who you truly want to be now versus who you've been in the past. Be playful!
Have fun! Discover the adventure that comes with an ever-expanding sense that who you are is
something more each and every day that you're alive.
Now let's have some fun by beginning a seven-day challenge where each day I'll give you a brief
exercise to use what you've been learning and give you an opportunity to start reaping the rewards of
some of the strategies and tools to which you've been exposed. Let's begin with . . .
PART THREE
THE SEVEN DAYS TO SHAPE YOUR
LIFE
19
EMOTIONAL DESTINY: THE ONLY TRUE SUCCESS - DAY ONE
Your Outcome: Take control of your consistent emotions and begin to consciously and deliberately203
reshape your daily experience of life.
There is no true success without emotional success, yet, of the more than 3,000 emotions that we
have words to describe, the average person experiences only about a dozen different ones in the
course of an average week. We must remember that this does not reflect our emotional capacity, but
rather the limitations of our present patterns of focus and physiology.
Throughout this book, we've continually studied the mastery of emotion, and you've developed a broad
spectrum of tools to powerfully and rapidly change any emotion you desire. You now realize that
changing how you feel is the motivation behind virtually all of your behaviors. Thus, it's time that you
develop a proactive plan for dealing with the negative emotional patterns that you habitually
experience. It's equally important to give yourself the gift of expanding the amount and quality of time
that you spend in positive emotional states. The arsenal of skills you have for changing your emotional
states includes:
•

physiology

•

beliefs

•

focus

•

compelling future

•

questions

•

values

•

submodalities

•

rules

•

Transformational Vocabulary

•

references

•

metaphors

•

identity

•

Neuro-Associative Conditioning

The purpose of today's exercise is simply to make you aware of your present emotional patterns and
get you to utilize as many of the above-listed skills as necessary to guarantee that you shape your own
emotional destiny daily.
"Seeing is believing, but feeling's the truth."
THOMAS FULLER, M.D.
Today's Assignment:
1. Write down all the emotions that you experience in an average week.
2. List the events or situations you use to trigger these emotions.

203

deliberate absichtlich, vorsätzlich; bedächtig, besonnen
3. Come up with an antidote for each negative emotion, and employ one of the appropriate tools for
responding to the Action Signal. Do you need to change the words you use to describe this experience?
Do you need to change what you believe about this emotional state? Do you need to ask yourself a
new question? Be sure to consistently focus on solutions instead of problems.
Commit throughout this day to replacing the old, limiting emotion with a new, empowering emotion,
and condition this new pattern until it's consistent. With our emotions well in hand, we'll begin
tomorrow to master our. . .
20
PHYSICAL DESTINY: PRISON OF PAIN OR PALACE OF PLEASURE
DAY TWO

Your Outcome: Just as you've learned to condition your nervous system to produce the behaviors that
will give you the results you want, the physical destiny you experience depends on how you condition
your metabolism and muscles to produce the levels of energy and fitness you desire.

His goal was to break a world record. For eleven straight days, he had been running twenty-one hours
a day and sleeping a mere three hours a night. The mental challenge was as great as the physical
challenge: he had to travel from the everyday world he'd lived in his entire life into one where his
primary objective was the next step. He devoted years of training not only to his body, but also to his
mind. His objective? To demonstrate the unlimited physical potential that lies locked within us all. By
breaking the previous record and running over 1,000 miles in eleven days and nineteen hours, at an
average of eighty-four miles per day, Stu Mittleman demonstrated that by understanding how to
condition both the mind and body, one can produce results far beyond anything society would consider
possible. He has proven by his example that the human capacity is incredible, and that we can adapt
to anything if we make the right demands upon ourselves incrementally. The purpose of this chapter is
to share with you the fundamental secrets that empowered Stu Mittleman to train himself to
accomplish this unparalleled task.
For years I have pursued those I've considered to be masters in their areas of expertise, and physical
fitness and health have been a major focus in my life for over a decade. When I first began my
research in this area, I became confused by the maelstrom of conflicting viewpoints expressed by
experts all supposedly equally qualified. For negotiating my way through the maze of opinions, my
number-one criterion was results.
Those who consistently produced quality results were the ones I emulated and learned from. Just as I
had a hard time giving credence204 to a doctor who was counseling patients about health but who
himself was forty pounds overweight, so, too, did I question the validity of so-called fitness experts
who appeared emaciated205 and had a host of injuries and low energy levels.
When I first heard about Stu Mittleman and his accomplishments, I became fascinated, particularly
when I heard further that all those who had witnessed his amazing feat said he looked better at the
end of his 1,000-mile run than he did when he left the starting line! He experienced no injuries—not
even a blister! What gave him the incredible capacity to stretch his body to its limits and still maximize
his potential without injuring it?

204
205

credence give credence to Glauben schenken (Dativ)
emaciated abgezehrt, ausgemergelt
Certainly, Stu was well-prepared for his run. He has master's degrees in sports psychology, sociology,
and social psychology, and is working toward a doctorate in exercise physiology at Columbia University.
But the knowledge that proved most invaluable to him was the distinction that health and fitness are
not the same. This is a distinction that Jim Fixx, the famous running-book author, did not have. He
was clearly fit, but also unhealthy.
The failure of most individuals to grasp the difference between fitness and health is what causes them
to experience the frustration of working out religiously and still having the same five to ten pounds
stubbornly clinging206 to their midsection. Talk about learned helpless-ness! Worse than that is the
plight207 of those who make exercise the centerpiece of their lives and believe that their actions are
making them healthier, yet each and every day they are pushing themselves one step further toward
fatigue, disease, and emotional upheaval208.
What exactly do I mean by the difference between health and fitness? Fitness is "the physical ability to
perform athletic activity." Health, however, is denned as "the state where all the systems of the
body—nervous, muscular, skeletal, circulatory, digestive209, lymphatic, hormonal, etc.—are working in
an optimal way ...." Most people think that fitness implies health, but the truth is that they don't
necessarily go hand in hand. It's ideal to have both health and fitness, but by putting health first, you
will always enjoy tremendous benefits in your life. If you achieve fitness at the expense of health, you
may not live long enough to enjoy your spectacular physique.
The optimum balance of health and fitness is achieved by training your metabolism210. Just as we train
our minds, and just as we train our muscles, Stu and one of his trainers, Dr. Philip Maffetone, have
proven that we can in fact train our metabolism. Stu's results definitely bear this out: while he was on
his 1,000-mile run, he certainly should have "hit the wall." Yet he never experienced this in spite of
running eighty-four miles a day. Understanding the simple yet profound distinctions that Stu used can
change not only how you look, but also your level of energy, the quality of your life, and ultimately the
physical destiny you set in motion.
The biggest difference between health and fitness comes down to understanding the distinction
between aerobic and anaerobic exercise, between endurance and power. Aerobic means, literally, "with
oxygen," and refers to moderate exercise sustained over a period of time. Your aerobic system is your
system for endurance, and encompasses the heart, lungs, blood vessels, and aerobic muscles. If you
activate your aerobic system with proper diet and exercise, you bum/at as your primary fuel.
On the other hand, anaerobic means, literally, "without oxygen," and refers to exercises that produce
short bursts of power. Anaerobic exercise bums glycogen as its primary fuel, while causing the body to
store fat. Genetics plays a part in your body's ability to bum fat and, in fact, some people are born
with a highly aerobic system already in place.
These are the people we envy who seemingly can eat anything and not gain an ounce. Most types of
exercise can be either aerobic or anaerobic. The level of intensity determines whether you are using
your aerobic or anaerobic system. Walking, jogging, running, biking, swimming, dancing, etc., can
206
207
208
209

cling (clung) (to) festhalten (an Dativ), sich klammern (an Akkusativ); sich (an)schmiegen (an Akkusativ)
plight Not(lage) weiblich
upheaval übertragen Umwälzung
digestive verdauungsfördernd; Verdauungs...
provide either benefit. Lower heart rates make these activities aerobic, and higher heart rates make
them anaerobic. . . . Usually, tennis, racquetball, basketball, and similar sports are anaerobic.
Most Americans today have a lifestyle that causes them to live in a constantly anaerobic state,
inundated211 with stress and demands, compounding it with the way they choose to exercise. As a
result, they train their metabolism to continuously be anaerobic, i.e., bum glycogen as a primary
source of energy. When levels of glycogen become excessively low, the anaerobically trained
metabolism turns to blood sugar as its secondary source of fuel. This immediately disrupts your level
of health and vitality.
As your anaerobic demands rob your body of blood sugar you could be using for other tasks, you
immediately begin to feel the negative effects. Since your nervous system demands the use of twothirds of your blood sugar, the deficit created by anaerobic exercise can cause neuromuscular
problems like headaches or disorientation. Here is a list of some telltale symptoms directly related to
excessive anaerobic training of your metabolism: fatigue, recurrent exercise injuries, low blood sugar
patterns, depression and anxiety, fat metabolism problems, premenstrual syndrome, or circulation
problems and stiff joints.
We live in a society that is anaerobic-excessive and aerobic-deficient, and it's negatively impacting the
quality of health across the nation. In modem, industrialized society, people become less physically
active. Only a few decades ago, most people accomplished their daily chores in a physical way. Today,
though, we have designed active demands for our bodies to replace the inactivity that our day-to-day
life no longer creates. This forced activity we call exercise. Unfortunately, many people with positive
intentions, including skilled athletes, are becoming less healthy with exercise. Out of our drive to
produce the greatest results in the shortest period of time, most of us create an improper balance
between health and fitness, and suffer the consequences.
The solution, however, is simple. Stu Mittleman's secret is that he understands that health and fitness
must go together. According to Dr. Maffetone, this is accomplished by understanding that all exercise
programs require that you begin by building an aerobic base—a period of time during which your entire
exercise program is exclusively based upon aerobic activity without any anaerobic exercise at all. This
base period may last from a minimum of two to a maximum of about eight months, during which your
aerobic system is developed and maximized. This base period is then followed by anaerobic workouts
of one, two, or sometimes three per week. Properly developing your aerobic system will not only make
you a better athlete, [but] it will also bum off the extra fat from your hips, improve your immune
system, give you more energy, and keep you relatively injury-free. In other words, it's a way to build
your total health and fitness through both the proper conditioning of your metabolism for aerobic and,
when appropriate, anaerobic training
By creating an aerobic base, you'll also create a tremendous amount of energy and endurance.
Remember, by expanding your aerobic capacity, you're expanding your body's ability to deliver oxygen
(the source of energy and health) to every organ and system of the body. The problem is that most
people try to push themselves beyond their ideal heart rates, and they spend all their time exercising

210
211

metabolism PHYSIOLOGIE Stoffwechsel
inundate überschwemmen, -fluten (auch übertragen)
in an anaerobic state. If you have not yet built an aerobic base, then all of your anaerobic exercise is
at the expense of endurance. Many people, out of their desire to "whip" themselves into a state of
fitness, try to exercise at their maximum heart rates. Traditionally, the formula for maximum heart
rate is 220 minus your age. For a thirty-year-old, this would mean aiming for a heart rate of 190.
Surely exercising at this intensity for long periods of time is one of the most destructive things you can
do to your body: it may make you "fit," but it will do so at the cost of your health.
By the way, guess who was guilty of this for several years. I pushed myself to "achieve" maximum
heart rate: I would jump onto my Stair-Master and crank it up to the highest level, and go for twenty
minutes.
Or, after not having run in several weeks, I would go out and run five miles with absolutely no warmup. I wouldn't be able to walk for several days afterward, but I believed that through this "no-pain, nogain" discipline I was making myself more healthy! All I was doing was establishing a love-hate
relationship with exercise. My mixed associations of pain and pleasure made me put it off as long as
my conscience would allow, then try to make up for lost time in just one session.
Since then I've learned that when you begin to work out at a pace which immediately throws your
body into anaerobic capacity, a very dangerous thing can occur. In order to supply the immediate
demand for blood that anaerobic exercise requires for the muscles that need it most, your body shunts
blood from critical organs like your liver and kidneys212. As a result, these organs lose a large amount
of oxygen, which significantly impairs their vitality and health. Continually doing this results in their
weakness, damage, or destruction.
The key is to train your metabolism to consistently operate in aerobic fashion. Your body won't bum fat
unless you specifically train it to do so. Thus, if you want to lose that persistent layer of fat around
your midsection, you must train your body to bum fat, not sugar. Remember that both Stu's and Phil's
criterion for aerobic function is the burning of fat. One of the biggest benefits of aerobic exercise is
that it prevents the clogging of arteries that leads to heart disease, the top cause of death in the
United States (responsible for killing one out oft every two people).
Some individuals, in their zeal to eliminate all fat from their diet, actually induce their body to enter an
"emergency" mode in which it begins to store fat even more efficiently. They compound the mistakes
by starving themselves, and when they inevitably return to old eating patterns, even more fat is stored
from the same amount of food they had been eating before the diet—and they gain back more weight
than they lost! This is why our culture is so obsessed with losing "those last ten pounds."
When people tell me they want to lose ten pounds, I ask them, "Ten pounds of what?" Most often
they're exercising in a way that causes them to lose water or muscle, not fat. You can weigh the same
amount today as you weighed ten years ago but be much less healthy because your muscle has been
replaced with fat. Muscle weighs more than fat, so if you weigh the same as you did ten years ago and
your body is made up of even more fat, you're in deep trouble!
While it's true we want to limit our fat intake so it's not excessive (20 percent to 30 percent of your
caloric intake), nothing can compare with aerobic exercise for training your metabolism to bum fat.
There is no one "right" percentage of fat intake for all individuals; it depends on how you metabolize
212

kidney ANATOMIE Niere
the fat you do ingest. Wouldn't you love to have the same capacity that you envy in others who seem
to be blessed with metabolisms that bum fat? You can! It's all a matter of conditioning.
So how do you train your metabolism to bum fat so that you have the energy, endurance, and vitality
to put into practice everything you've learned in this book and live life to the fullest? I have some good
news and some bad news. First the good news: you can accomplish this through some simple steps
each day. Now the bad news: you won't be able to use the traditional American method of filling the
bathtub, pulling the plug, and fighting the current! Neither will driving a golf cart from hole to hole do
the trick. These are not forms of aerobic exercise. Throwing your pendulum to the other extreme won't
work, either. Wind sprints are an anaerobic exercise. They create an immediate oxygen deficit in the
cells and begin to cause you to train your metabolism to bum glycogen and/or blood sugar; thus, the
fat continues to be stored.
Probably the most important element to one's health is oxygen. Every day, we breathe approximately
2,500 gallons of air in order to supply our tissues with oxygen. Without it, cells become weakened and
die. There are about 75 trillion cells in your body, and they provide you with adenosine triphosphate
(ATP), the basic energy for everything that your body does, whether it's breathing, dreaming, eating,
or exercising. In order to survive, cells must have oxygen in order to bum glucose and create ATP for
continued growth.
The point is that you don't want to deplete oxygen during exercise. If you want to know whether
you've moved beyond aerobic into anaerobic, here's a simple test: when you're exercising, can you
talk (aerobic)? Or are you too winded (anaerobic)? Your breathing should be steady and audible, but
not labored. What does it feel like when you're working out? If you're exercising aerobically, it should
be pleasurable though tiring. If you're exercising anaerobically, you definitely feel pushed. On a scale
from 0 to 10, with 0 being minimum exertion and 10 being the most intense, what's your score? If
you've exceeded 7, then you've gone beyond aerobic into anaerobic; ideally, you'll evaluate yourself
between 6 and 7. Tapping your aerobic capacity requires a very specific form of training. First, it's
advisable to wear a heart-rate monitor. Then warm up gradually to reach your optimum aerobic
training zone. (See box below.)
Your warm-up will accomplish at least two things: 1) You will be gradually mobilizing the fatty acids
stored throughout your body to your bloodstream so that you can use your fat instead of your vital
blood sugar. This is critical. If you don't warm up, you may exercise aerobically, i.e., with oxygen in
the cells, but not burn the fat. During warm-up, you should count your heart rate at 50 percent of the
maximum using the standard method of calculation (see footnote for the heart rate box). 2)
You will prevent cramping213. This warm-up period should take about fifteen minutes. This allows your
body to gradually distribute blood to those areas that need it rather than immediately diverting it from
vital organs—a critical distinction to make sure that your workouts build health and fitness without
injuring your system. Second, exercise within your aerobic training zone for at least twenty minutes,
ideally working up to thirty to forty-five minutes.
The best way to find your optimal training heart rate is to apply the following formula:

213

cramp 1. MEDIZIN Krampf; TECHNIK Klammer; übertragen Fessel; 2. einengen, hemmen
COMPUTING YOUR IDEAL HEART RATE
180 - your age = your ideal heart rate (the rate at which you can exercise aerobically before going
anaerobic).
If you are recovering from a major illness or are on medication, subtract an additional 10 points. If you
have not exercised before, or have an injury or are gearing down in your training, or if you often get
colds or flu or have allergies, subtract 5 points.
If you have been exercising for up to two years without any real problems, and have not had colds or
flu more than once or twice per year, keep your score the same.
If you have been exercising for more than two years without any problems, while making progress in
competition without injury, add 5 points.
Before beginning any program of physical exercise, consult your physician.
Third, take twelve to fifteen minutes to cool down appropriately by walking or some other form of mild
movement. In this way you prevent your blood from pooling in your working muscles. If you abruptly
stop movement after exercise, there is no way for the blood to be returned for cleansing,
reoxygenation and redistribution. It will stay in the muscle, engorging it, and increasing toxicity in the
bloodstream. People are often reluctant214 to commit to a workout because they link too much pain to
it, either physical pain or the pain of not having enough time. But if you just give it a try, you'll make
two pleasant discoveries:
1) You'll love working out this way because it produces pleasure and no pain.
2) You’ll experience a level of physical vitality you've never felt before.
If you're concerned about the amount of time it takes, think of ways in which you can maximize your
time. For instance, while you're warming up you can listen to tapes, read, watch the news, do your
Morning or Evening Power Questions, read your values and rules hierarchy, and make other productive
uses of your time. When I asked Stu Mittleman what he recommends as a workout schedule, he
suggested starting out with at least three sessions a week, with fifteen minutes of warm-up, twenty
minutes at your aerobic training zone, and fifteen minutes of cool-down. Then graduate to longer
sessions as you see fit.
Am I suggesting to you that aerobic training is the only type of exercise worth doing? Of course not.
Having health and fitness is the goal; we want to enhance performance as well as endurance. (Just remember that any time you work out at an anaerobic pace, you do so at the expense of your
endurance.) So as you begin to develop your aerobic capacity, once you reach a plateau (somewhere
in your second to fourth month of exercise), you can build power by adding anaerobic exercise to your
regimen, such as by East repetitions with weights. This differs from person to person, and the best test
is to just listen to your body. If you're running on the beach, and suddenly feel like sprinting, do it!
Develop body wisdom; learn to notice your body's ability to handle more challenging physical tasks.
In fact, Stu assures us that we can maintain and improve endurance into our golden years. We do not
have to be frail215 in our old age! Chronology is not so much the arbiter of our health as is our

214
215

reluctant widerstrebend, widerwillig
frail ge-, zerbrechlich; zart, schwach
commitment to a health-enhancing lifestyle. Even though some people are born with a predisposition
to bum fat, or are blessed with a gift of speed or power, anyone can achieve endurance and vitality by
consciously deciding to condition their body's chemistry.
"We are not limited by our old age; we are liberated by it."
STU MITTLEMAN
The most exciting news of all is that, like all patterns that give us pleasure, exercise can become a
positive addiction. As much as you may currently avoid exercise, you will probably be more powerfully
drawn to it once you discover how pleasurable it is to work out properly. Research has shown that if
you exercise consistently for over a twelve-month period of time, you will form this positive addiction
for a lifetime. Even if you get off track for a period of time, you'll always return to a consistent exercise
regimen throughout your life. Your body will be driven to the pleasure of health, to the natural high of
maximizing your physical potential. Why is this? You will have trained your nervous system by
conditioning your metabolism to thrive on this experience. We all deserve the physical vitality that can
transform the quality of our lives. Your physical destiny is intimately related to your mental, emotional,
financial, and relationship destinies. In fact, it will determine whether you have a destiny at all!

THE FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH
An undeniably powerful totem in our culture is youth and physical vitality. Think of the old men and
women who got a new lease on life in the movie Cocoon. So many people chase after whatever they
think will prolong their "youth," while the real fountain of youth already exists within them. It's known
as human growth hormone (HGH). HGH stimulates tissue growth, increases muscle tone and lean
mass, enhances flexibility, thickens muscles, stimulates the growth of bones and organs, and helps
maintain healthy tissues. From the time you're born to approximately the age of thirty, HGH is
naturally released into the bloodstream about an hour and a half after you go to sleep and also once
before you wake up in the morning. (I just turned thirty-one this year, so I don't buy that time
schedule!) High levels of HGH naturally drop over time. By age sixty, about 30 percent of men produce
little or none of the substance. It is conjectured that women continue to secrete growth hormone into
their old age, and that's one of the reasons they live longer. We also receive human growth hormone
bursts after heavy exercise and/or after a serious injury because HGH is a healing substance. HGH is
now being synthesized in laboratories and administered to children who have dwarfism to stimulate
their growth. But how can you enhance your own natural abilities to release HGH into your system?
The one way to trigger it instantly and continuously is through explosive exercise. This means
performing repetitions of an activity which you can maintain for thirty-five to forty-five seconds only,
such as heavy weight lifting. Laboratory tests in Miami, Florida, have produced exciting results. People
in their sixties who've gone at least ten to fifteen years without any muscle tone are learning to lift
weights and create muscle mass equivalent to that of twenty-one-year-olds, with energy levels to
match.
What does all of this mean? It means that you can be as strong in your seventies and eighties as you
were in your twenties and thirties! Not only can you continue to build your endurance factor with
aerobic exercise, as we've already discussed, but you can continue to boost your power with short,
explosive bursts of anaerobic exercise. Just remember the other factor in the equation: give your body
the nutrients it needs. Make sure you aren't poisoning your body with excess sugar, fats, salt, or meat.
All of this is great news, since as we enter the twenty-first century, estimates are that 24 percent of
the American population is expected to be over the age of sixty-five. If we take control of our bodies
now, one out of every four Americans will not be a drain on society, but a strong and vital member
who makes valuable contributions and enjoys life to the utmost!
"The human body is the best picture of the human soul."
LUDW1G WITTGENSTEIN
Today's Assignment:
1. Make the distinction between fitness and health. You've done this already.
2. Decide to become healthy. I hope you've done this already, too.
3. Know where you are. Are you currently exercising aerobically or anaerobically? Are you burning fat
or glycogen? Either visit somebody who can test you, or answer the following questions:
Do you wake up in the morning feeling tired?
Do you feel famished after working out?
Do you experience wild mood swings after working out?
Does that same layer of fat hang in there despite your most diligent efforts?
Do you feel aches and pains after exercising?
If you answered yes to these questions, chances are that you're exercising anaerobically.
4. Purchase a portable heart-rate monitor (they cost in the range of $175 to $200). It's one of the best
investments you'll ever make.
5. Develop a plan. Condition your metabolism to burn fat and produce consistent levels of energy by
beginning a ten-day program of aerobic exercise according to the guidelines I outlined above. Begin
immediately.
6. Part of your ten-day challenge, if you want to extend it, is to read the chapter "Energy: The Fuel of
Excellence" in my first book, Unlimited Power.
7. Decide to make exercise pan216 of your identity. It is only through a long-term, lifelong commitment
to exercise that we can truly reap the rewards that life has to offer us.
Now, let's hold ourselves to a higher standard by increasing the quality of our . ..

216

pan Pfanne; Topf
21
RELATIONSHIP DESTINY: THE PLACE TO SHARE AND CARE -DAY
THREE

Your Outcome: Measurably enhance the quality of your personal relationships, and deepen your
emotional connection with the people you care about most by reviewing the six fundamentals of
successful relationships.

Success is worthless if we don't have someone to share it with; indeed, our most desired human
emotion is that of connection with other souls. Throughout this book we've talked consistently about
the impact of relationships on shaping character, values, beliefs, and the quality of our lives.
Specifically, today's exercise is designed simply to remind you of six key points that are valuable to
any relationship. Let's briefly review them before I give you your assignment for today:
1. If you don't know the values and rules of the people with whom you share a relationship, you should
prepare for pain. People can love each other, but if for whatever reason they consistently break the
rules of someone they care about, there are going to be upsets and stress in this relationship.
Remember, every upset you've ever had with another human being has been a rules upset, and when
people become intimately involved, it's inevitable that some of their rules will clash. By knowing a
person's rules, you can head off these challenges in advance.
2. Some of the biggest challenges in relationships come from the fact that most people enter a
relationship in order to get something: they're trying to find someone who's going to make them feel
good. In reality, the only way a relationship will last is if you see your relationship as a place that you
go to give, and not a place that you go to take.
3. Like anything else in life, in order for a relationship to be nurtured, there are certain things to look
for—and to look out for. There are certain warning signals within your relationship that can flag you
that you need to tackle a problem immediately before it gets out of hand. In her book How to Make
Love All the Time, my friend Dr. Barbara DeAngelis identifies four pernicious phases that can kill a
relationship. By identifying them, we can immediately intervene and eliminate problems before they
balloon into destructive patterns that threaten the relationship itself.
Stage One, Resistance: The first phase of challenges in a relationship is when you begin to feel
resistance. Virtually anyone who's ever been in a relationship has had times when they felt resistance
toward something their partner said or did. Resistance occurs when you take exception or feel annoyed
or a bit separate from this person. Maybe at a party they tell a joke that bothers you and you wish
they hadn't. The challenge, of course, is that most people don't communicate when they're feeling a
sense of resistance, and as a result, this emotion continues to grow until it becomes . . .
Stage Two, Resentment217: If resistance is not handled, it grows into resentment. Now you're not
just annoyed; you're angry with your partner. You begin to separate yourself from them and erect an
emotional barrier. Resentment destroys the emotion of intimacy, and this is a destructive pattern
within a relationship that, if unchecked, will only gain speed. If it is not transformed or communicated,
it turns into .. .
Stage Three, Rejection: This is the point when you have so much resentment built up that you find
yourself looking for ways to make your partner wrong, to verbally or nonverbally attack them. In this
phase, you begin to see everything they do as irritating or annoying. It's here that not only emotional
separation occurs, but also physical separation as well. If rejection is allowed to continue, to lessen our
pain, we move to ...
Stage Four, Repression218: When you are tired of coping with the anger that comes with the
rejection phase, you try to reduce your pain by creating emotional numbness. You avoid feeling any
pain, but you also avoid passion and excitement. This is the most dangerous phase of a relationship
because this is the point at which lovers become roommates—no one else knows the couple has any
problems because they never fight, but there's no relationship left. What's the key to preventing these
"Four R's"? The answer is simple: communicate clearly up front. Make sure your rules are known and
can be met. To avoid blowing things out of proportion, use Transformational Vocabulary. Talk in terms
of preferences: instead of saying, "I can't stand it when you do that!," say, "I'd prefer it if you did this
instead." Develop pattern interrupts to prevent the type of argument where you can't even remember
what it's about anymore, only that you've got to win.
4. Make your relationships one of the highest priorities in your life; otherwise they will take a back seat
to any or all of the other things that are more urgent that happen during your day. Gradually, the level
of emotional intensity and passion will drift away. We don't want to lose the power of our relationships
simply because we got caught up in the law of familiarity, or we let neglect habituate us to the intense
excitement and passion we have for a person.
5. One of the most important patterns that Becky and I discovered early that is critical to making our
relationship last is to focus each day on making it better, rather than focusing on what might happen if
it ended. We must remember that whatever we focus on we'll experience. If we constantly focus on
our fear of a relationship being over, we'll begin to do things unconsciously to sabotage it so that we
can extract ourselves before we get too entwined and true pain results.
A corollary to this principle is that if you want your relationship to last, never, never, never, ever, ever
threaten the relationship itself. In other words, don't ever say, "If you do that, then I'm leaving." just
making this statement alone creates the possibility. It also induces a destabilizing fear in both partners.
Every couple that I've ever interviewed with a lasting relationship has made it their rule, no matter
how angry or hurt they felt, never to question whether or not the relationship would last and never to
threaten to leave it. Just remember the racing school metaphor of the skid car and the wall. You want
to focus on where you want to go in a relationship, not on what you fear.

217
218

resentment Ärger (against, at über Akkusativ)
repression Unterdrückung; PSYCHOLOGIE Verdrängung
6. Each day, reassociate to what you love about this person you're in a relationship with. Reinforce
your feelings of connection and renew your feelings of intimacy and attraction by consistently asking
the question, "How did I get so lucky to have you in my life?" Become fully associated to the privilege
of sharing your life with this person; feel the pleasure intensely, and continuously anchor it into your
nervous system. Engage in a never-ending quest to find new ways to surprise each other. If you don't,
habituation will set in, and you will take each other for granted. So find and create those special
moments that can make your relationship a role model—one that's legendary!
"In a full heart there is room for everything, and in an empty heart there is room for nothing."
ANTONIO PORCHIA

Today's Assignment:
1. Take the time today to talk with your significant other and find out what's most important to each of
you in your relationship. What are your highest values in a relationship together, and what has happen
for you to feel like those values are being fulfilled?
2. Decide that it's more important for you to be in love than to be right. If you should ever find
yourself in the position of insisting that you're right, break your own pattern. Stop immediately and
come back to the discussion later when you're in a better state to resolve your conflicts.
3. Develop a pattern interrupt that you both agree to use when things become most heated. In this
way, no matter how mad you are, for at least a moment you can smile and let go of the upset. To
make it easier for both of you, use the most bizarre or humorous pattern interrupt you can devise.
Make it a private joke that can serve as your personal anchor,

j

4. When you feel resistance, communicate it with softeners such as, "I know it's only my idiosyncrasy,
but when you do that, it makes me a tad peckish."

;

5. Plan regular date nights together, preferably once a week, or at the minimum, two times a month.
Take turns surprising your partner and dreaming up the most romantic and fun things to do.
6. Make sure you get a good,180-second wet kiss every day! These are your only assignments for
today! Act upon them and enjoy them. I can promise you, the rewards are immeasurable. To make
sure that we commit to constant and never-ending improvement, CANI!, on a daily basis, let's develop
an enjoyable plan by creating your . . .
22
FINANCIAL DESTINY: SMALL STEPS TO A SMALL (OR LARGE)
FORTUNE - DAY FOUR

Your Outcome: Take control of your financial future by learning the five foundational elements for
establishing wealth.
Money! It's one of the most emotionally charged issues of our lives. Most people are willing to give up
things that are much more valuable than money in order to get more of it: they'll push themselves far
beyond their past limitations, give up time with their family and friends, or even destroy their health.
Money is a potent source associated to both pain and pleasure within our society. Too often it's used to
measure the difference in the quality of lives, to magnify the separation of the haves and have-nots.
Some people try to deal with money by pretending it doesn't matter, but financial pressure is
something that affects us all every day of our lives. For the elderly especially, a lack of money often
translates into a lack of critical resources. For some people, money holds mystery. For others, it is the
source of desire, pride, envy, and even contempt. Which is it, really? Is it the maker of dreams or the
root of all evil? Is it a tool or a weapon? A source of freedom, power, security? Or merely a means to
an end?
You and I know, intellectually, that money is merely a medium of exchange. It allows us to simplify the
process of creating, transferring, and sharing value within a society. It's a convenience that together
we've created in order to allow ourselves the freedom to specialize in our life's work without having to
be concerned as to whether others will find our work worthy of barter.
We have learned to associate some of our most debilitating emotions to a scarcity of this commodity:
anxiety, frustration, fear, insecurity, worry, anger, humiliation, and being overwhelmed, to name but
a few. As we are now witnessing in Eastern Europe, political systems have been toppled by the
pressure associated to financial deprivation. Can you think of any country, any corporation, or
anyone's personal life that has not been touched by the experience of financial stress?
Many people make the mistake of thinking that all the challenges in their lives would dissipate if they
just had enough money. Nothing could be further from the truth. Earning more money, in and of itself,
rarely frees people. It's equally ridiculous to tell yourself that greater financial freedom and mastery of
your finances would not offer you greater opportunities to expand, share, and create value for yourself
and others.
So why do so many people fail to achieve financial abundance in a nation where economic opportunity
surrounds us? We live in a country where people can create net worths in the hundreds of millions
starting with a little idea for a computer that they first built in their garage! All around us there are
role models of unbelievable possibility, people who know how to create wealth and maintain it. What is
it that keeps us from getting wealth in the first place? How can it be, living in a capitalist country
where our forefathers died for our right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, where economic
reform was a major stimulus for independence, that 95 percent of the American population by age
sixty- five, after a lifetime of work, cannot support themselves without help from government or family?
As I've pursued the keys to building lasting wealth, one thing becomes clear: creating wealth is simple.
Yet most people never build it because they have holes in their financial foundations. These can be
found in the form of internal value and belief conflicts, as well as poor plans that virtually guarantee
financial failure. This chapter will not provide you with everything you need to know to master your
entire financial life. It would certainly take more than a chapter to do that! But it is designed to give
you some simple fundamentals that you can use to take immediate control of this critically
important area.
Let's begin by remembering the power that our beliefs have to control our behaviors. The most
common reason most people do not become financially successful is that they have mixed
associations to what it would take to have more money, as well as what it would mean to have
excess money, i.e., money beyond what they need to support their current lifestyle. As you learned in
Chapter 5, your brain knows what to do only when it has a clear association about what it needs to
avoid and what it needs to move toward. For money, we often send mixed signals—and so we get
mixed results. We tell ourselves that money will provide us freedom, a chance to give to those we love,
a chance to do all those things we've always dreamed about, a chance to free up our time. Yet
simultaneously we may believe that in order to accumulate an abundance of money, we'd have to work
so much harder, and spend so much more time that we'd probably be too old and tired to enjoy it. Or
we may believe that if we have excess money, we won't be spiritual, or we'll be judged, or someone
will swindle us out of it anyway, so why even try?
These negative associations are not limited to ourselves. Some people resent anyone who is doing well
financially, and often they assume that if someone has made a lot of money, he or she must have
done something to take advantage of others. If you find yourself resenting someone who is wealthy,
what message does that send your brain? It's probably something like "Having excess money is bad."
If you harbor these feelings for others, you're subconsciously teaching your mind that for you to do
well would make you a "bad" person. By resenting others' success, you condition yourself to avoid the
very financial abundance that you need and desire.
The second most common reason why so many people never master money is simply that they think
it's too complex. They want an "expert" to handle it for them. While it's very valuable to get expert
coaching (which is why we created our own financial company, Destiny Financial Services™), we all
must be trained to understand the consequences of our financial decisions. If you exclusively depend
upon someone else, no matter how competent they are, you'll always have them to blame for what
occurs. But if you take responsibility for understanding your finances, you can begin to direct your own
destiny.
Everything in this book is based upon the idea that we have the power to understand how our minds,
bodies, and emotions work, and because of this, we have the capacity to exert a great deal of control
over our destinies. Our financial world is no different. We must understand it and not limit ourselves by
beliefs about the complexity of finances. Once you understand the fundamentals, mastering money is
a fairly simple matter. So the first task I would give you in taking control of your financial world is to
utilize the NAC (Neuro-Associative Conditioning) technology to condition yourself for financial success.
Become clearly associated with all the great things you could do for your family and the peace of mind
you'd feel if you had true economic abundance.
The third major belief that keeps people from succeeding financially and creates tremendous stress is
the concept of scarcity219. Most people believe they live in a world where everything is limited: there's
only so much available land, so much oil, so many quality homes, so many opportunities, so much
time. With this philosophy of life, in order for you to win, somebody else has to lose. It's a zero-sum
game. If you believe this, the only way to become financially successful is to follow the approach of the
robber barons of the early 1900s and corner the market on a particular product so that you get 95
percent of something while everyone else has to split the remaining 5 percent.
The truth of the matter, however, is that cornering a scarce supply no longer guarantees lasting wealth.
A good friend of mine is economist Paul Pilzer, a Wharton Business School graduate who has become
quite famous for his economic theory of alchemy. Paul has recently written a book that I highly
recommend—the title itself reflects his core belief and the evidence he has to back it up: we live in a
resource-rich environment. He calls it Unlimited Wealth. Paul points out that we are in a unique time
in human history, where the traditional idea of obtaining scarce physical resources is no longer the
primary arbiter of wealth. Today, technology determines the value of a physical resource and
how large a supply of it actually exists.
When I interviewed him for my PowerTalk audio-magazine, Paul gave me a great example
demonstrating how the value of resources and their availability is completely controlled by technology,
and that technology thus determines the price and value of any product or service. In the seventies,
everyone was certain that we were running out of oil. By 1973, people were spending hours in gas
lines, and after sophisticated computerized analysis, the best experts in the world were predicting that
we had approximately 700 billion barrels of oil left in the entire world, which, at our then-current rate
of consumption, would last thirty-five to forty years. Paul said that if these experts were correct, then
by 1988 we should have seen our oil reserves dwindle to 500 billion barrels. Yet by 1987, we had
nearly 30 percent more oil than we had fifteen years earlier! In 1988, estimates indicated that we had
900 billion barrels, counting only our proven reserves. This didn't include the nearly 2,000 billion
additional barrels of oil that researchers now believe our new discovery-and-recovery techniques may
be able to tap.
What made this radical change in the amount of oil that was available? Two things: certainly our ability
to find oil has been enhanced by technology, and technology has also powerfully impacted our ability
to utilize oil more efficiently. Who would have thought back in 1973 that someone would come up with
the idea for computerized fuel injectors that would be installed in virtually every automobile in the
United States and instantly double the fuel efficiency of our cars? What's more, this computer chip cost
$25 and replaced a $300 carburetor!
The minute this technology was developed, it instantly doubled the effective supply of gasoline and
changed the relative scarcity of oil overnight. In fact, the price of oil today, adjusted for inflation and
based upon the distance it will now take you with today's more fuel-efficient cars, actually costs you
219

scarcity Mangel, Knappheit (of an Dativ)
less per mile than at any time in the history of the automobile. In addition, we live in a world where,
when companies or individuals begin to experience too much economic pain, they immediately look for
alternative sources to produce the results they're after. Scientists all over the world are finding
alternatives to the use of petroleum for the powering of factories, automobiles, and even airplanes.
Paul said that what happened to the Hunt brothers of Texas is a powerful example that the old
strategy of cornering the market on some commodities just doesn't work anymore. When the Hunts
attempted to take complete control of the silver market, they went broke. Why? One major reason is
that the largest user of silver in the world was Kodak Corporation, which utilized silver in the
developing process. Motivated by the pain of increased prices, Kodak began to find alternative ways of
processing photographs, and as a result less silver was needed. Instantly, silver prices plunged, and
the Hunts were wiped out.
This is a common mistake made by some of the most powerful people in today's society who continue
to operate using the old formula for creating wealth. You and I need to realize that the value of
anything is purely dependent upon technology. Technology can turn a waste product into an invaluable
resource. After all, there was a time when having oil on your land was a curse, but technology turned
it into a source of wealth.
True wealth, Paul says, comes from the ability to practice what he calls "economic alchemy," which is
the ability to take something that has very little value and convert it into something of
significantly greater value. In medieval times, those who practiced alchemy were trying to convert
lead into gold. They failed. But in attempting this process, they laid the foundation for the science of
chemistry. Those who are wealthy today are truly modem-day alchemists. They have learned to
transform something common into something precious and have reaped the economic rewards that
come with this transformation. When you think about it, doesn't the magnificent processing speed of a
computer really reduce down to dirt? After all, silicon comes from sand. Those who've taken ideas—
mere thoughts—and turned them into products and services are certainly practicing alchemy. All
wealth begins in the mind!
Modem alchemy has been the source of financial success for the wealthiest people in the world today,
whether it is Bill Gates, Ross Perot, Sam Walton or Steven Jobs. All of these individuals found ways to
take items of hidden value—ideas, information, systems—and organize them in a way that would
enable more people to use them. As they added this value, they began to create tremendous economic
empires.
Let's review the five fundamental lessons for creating lasting wealth. And then I'll immediately put you
to work on beginning to take control of your financial destiny.
1. The first key is the ability to earn more income than ever before, the ability to create
wealth. I have a simple question for you. Can you earn twice as much money as you do now in the
same amount of time? Can you earn three times as much money? Ten times? Is it possible that you
could earn 1,000 times the amount of money you do now in the same amount of time? Absolutely!—if
you find a way to be worth 1,000 times more to your company or your fellow man.
The key to wealth is to be more valuable. If you have more skills, more ability, more intelligence,
specialized knowledge, a capacity to do things few others can do, or if you just think creatively and
contribute on a massive scale, you can earn more than you ever thought possible. The single most
important and potent way to expand your income is to devise a way to consistently add real value
to people's lives, and you will prosper. For example, why is a doctor paid more than a doorman?
The answer is simple: the doctor adds more value. He has worked harder and developed himself so
that he is worth more in terms of his capacity to add measurable value to people's lives. Anyone can
open a door. A doctor opens the doors of life.
Why are successful entrepreneurs so well rewarded financially in our culture? It's because they add
more value than virtually anyone around them. There are two primary benefits that entrepreneurs
create. First, they obviously add value to their customers by increasing the quality of their lives
through the use of their product. This, by the way, is critical for any company to prosper. So often,
companies forget that their real purpose for being is not just to make a profit. While a profit is an
absolute must for a company to survive and flourish—like eating or sleeping, a necessity—it's not the
real purpose. The true purpose of any corporation is to create products and services that
increase the quality of life for all the customers they serve. If this is achieved on a consistent
basis, then profit is absolutely assured. However, a company can profit in the short term and not be
here in the long term if it doesn't continually add value to people's lives. This holds true for
corporations as much as individuals.
The second thing that entrepreneurs do is that, in creating their products, they create jobs. Because of
these jobs, the employees' children can go on to higher education and become doctors, lawyers,
teachers, social workers, and add more value to society as a whole—not to mention the fact that these
families spend the money that they earn with other vendors. The chain of value is never-ending. When
Ross Perot was asked for the secret of his wealth, he said, "What I can do for this country is create
jobs. I'm pretty good at that, and Lord knows we need them."* The more value you contribute, the
more you will earn if you put yourself in the position to do so.

;

The lesson is simple. You don't have to be an entrepreneur to add more value. But what you must do
every day is to continually expand your knowledge, your skill, and your ability to give more. This is
why self-education is so critical. I became a very wealthy man at an extremely young age for one
reason: I mastered skills and abilities that could instantaneously increase the quality of life for virtually
anyone. Then I figured out a way to share that information and those skills with a huge number of
people in a short period of time. As a result, I have prospered not only emotionally, but financially as
well.
If you want to earn more money where you are today, one of the simplest ways to do so is to ask
yourself, "How can I be worth more to this company? How can 1 help it to achieve more in less time?
How could I add a tremendous amount of value to it? Are there some ways that I could help cut costs
and increase quality? What new system could I develop? What new technology could I use that would
allow the company to produce its products and services more effectively?" If we can help people to do
more with less, then we truly are empowering others, and we will be empowered economically as well,
as long as we put ourselves in a position to do so.
In our Financial Destiny seminars, participants brainstorm ways they can add more value and therefore
increase their income. We ask them to consider whether they have resources they've been failing to
use. The key question to ask yourself is: How could I help touch more lives? How could I do it at a
deeper level? How could I give a better quality of product or service? Inevitably, some people will say,
"There's no way that I could add-more value; I'm already working sixteen hours a day as it is!"
Remember, I didn't suggest you work harder or even that you need to work smarter. What I'm asking
is what new resources could you employ that could add more value to other people?
For example, I remember a massage therapist who was one of the most successful in his field in the
San Diego area, and he wanted to know how he could increase his earnings when he was booked solid.
He couldn't see one more person a day, and he was already charging the highest rates in his field. As
he began to brainstorm new ideas, focusing on how he could take the resources he had to help his
patients and others, he began to realize that if he could team up with someone who owned a physicaltherapy unit, and refer his patients who needed help, he could receive a referral fee. His income is now
almost double, working the same number of hours a day. All he did was find a way to add more value
to both his doctors and his clients. Since he knew the doctors well, and they understood his form of
therapy, there was a greater consistency of care between them, and he benefited financially in the
process.
In Phoenix, Arizona, one of the top radio salespersons is a woman whose primary marketing strategy
is not merely to sell radio time, but to constantly look for opportunities to help local companies prosper.
For example, the minute she hears that a new shopping center is going to be built, she contacts
potential vendors for the shopping center and lets them know about the opportunity, allowing them to
get a jump on the market. She then contacts the developer, and introduces herself as a radio-station
representative who works with people in their industry all the time. Would the developer like to see a
list of the top vendors in their fields?
Out of this strategy, several things result. She's adding value beyond the radio time people would
purchase to promote their companies. She's found a way to give them much more than anyone else
around, so they usually buy a significant portion, if not all, of their radio time from her. This motivates
them to reciprocate value for value. This does not require a great deal of her time, but it makes her
more valuable to her customers than any other radio salesperson in the region, and her income
reflects it.
Even if you work in a large corporation, you can add more value. I remember a woman who was a
claims processor for a hospital. She saw how slowly things were going and, knowing that claims
processing was the economic lifeline of the hospital, she discovered that she could be much more
efficient and potentially process four to five times as many claims as she had previously. She asked
her supervisors, if she could do the work of five people, would they increase her salary by 50 percent?
They said that if she proved she could consistently produce results over a period of time, they would
do so. Since then, not only has she increased job efficiency and her income, she has a newfound sense
of pride.
The key to increasing your income with your company is remembering that you can't just increase the
quality of what you're doing by 50 percent and expect a 50 percent increase in income. A company
must profit. The question to ask yourself is, "How can I increase the value of what I do by ten to
fifteen times7' If you do this, in most cases you'll have no trouble increasing your income.

THE DISTRIBUTION WAVE OF THE FUTURE
One of the most powerful ways of adding value in the nineties and beyond is understanding that in
today's society, wealth is created by distribution. Products and services are changing constantly,
but those who've figured a way to take something of tremendous value and deliver it to a mass
number of people will prosper. This has been the secret of the richest man in the United States, Sam
Walton. He became wealthy by creating a distribution system. Ross Perot did the same thing with
information at EDS. If you can figure out how to take something that already has great value and
distribute it to people, or distribute it at a lower cost, then you've found another way of adding value.
Adding value is not just creating products; it's finding a way to make sure that more people experience
an increase in the quality of life.
But of course, if we really think about it, you and I know why people don't do well financially. Yes, they
have limiting beliefs. But more importantly, there's a core belief that most people have: they should
get something for nothing. Most people, for example, expect their income to grow each and every year,
whether they've increased their contribution to their company or not.
Raises should be tied to increased value, and we can easily increase our value as long as we educate
ourselves and expand our repertoire of skills. Any company that continually gives people raises without
its employees finding ways to add more value is a company that's going deeper in the hole and will
eventually find itself economically troubled or destroyed. If you're asking for a raise, you've got to find
a way to add at least ten times more value than what you're asking for in return.
Companies, too, must realize that as they're looking to invest in equipment, equipment gives a limited
return. As Paul Pilzer says, labor is capital. If someone makes $50,000 a year and can generate
$500,000 in value, why not fake this person and increase their skill, ability, talent, attitude, and
education, so that they can add a million dollars in value? A $50,000 investment that brings a $1
million return is a very, very valuable asset. There is no better investment that companies can make
than in the education and development of their own people.
"Wealth is the product of man's capacity to think."
AYN RAND
For years I helped people throughout the nation increase the quality of their lives by taking ideas that
were valuable and delivering them in a way that people could truly utilize them. By creating a
technology for change and delivering it in an impactful way, I prospered. But my prosperity exploded
when one day I asked myself, "How can I reach more people than ever before? How can I reach people
while I sleep?" As a result of those empowering questions, I discovered a way to expand my influence
in a way that I had never even considered before: by offering my audio-tapes through television.
That was two years ago. Since that time, we've now distributed over 7 million audiotapes of my
Personal Power program around the world, sharing ideas and information that continue to impact
people twenty-four hours a day! My partners at Cassette Productions estimate that, in the last twentyfour months, the amount of tape that's been used to carry my message is enough to circle the earth
twenty times at the equator! In the process, I've had the joy of knowing that we not only impact the
quality of life for all those who have used our tapes, but we've also provided about 75,000 hours of
employment in the manufacturing process. This does not include all the hours that other vendors have
spent as well.
You've heard many examples of how adding value creates wealth. The formula is simple and powerful.
Ask yourself, "How can I add more value to any environment I'm in?" In your work environment,
ask yourself the question, "How have I made or saved my company money in the last twelve months?"
True contribution makes life richer, so don't limit yourself to adding value strictly for
personal gain. How can you add more value in your home, in your church, in your school, in your
community? If you can figure out a way to add at least ten times more value than what you're looking
for, you'll always feel fulfilled. Imagine what life would be like if everyone followed your example.
2. The second key is to maintain your wealth. Once you have an effective strategy for
accumulating wealth, for earning large sums of money, how do you maintain it? Contrary to popular
opinion, you can't maintain wealth simply by continuing to earn money. We've all heard of the famous
people who've made fortunes and lost them overnight: the athletes whose talent allowed them to
make huge sums but who have created lifestyles that depleted it the moment their income changed.
When their income dropped, they often had tremendous demands that they couldn't possibly meet,
and they lost it all.
There's only one way to maintain your wealth, and that is simply this: spend less than you earn,
and invest the difference. Without question, although this is not a very sexy principle, it is the only
way to secure wealth over the long term. What never ceases to amaze me, though, is to see that no
matter how much money people earn, they seem to find a way to spend it. The annual incomes of
people who attend our Financial Destiny seminars range from $30,000 up to $2 million, with the
average being around $100,000. People from even the highest-earning categories are often "broke."
Why? Because they make all their economic decisions based on the short term rather than the long
term. They have no clear-cutspending plan, much less an investment plan. They're on a course
for Niagara Falls.
The only possible way to build wealth is to pick a specific percentage of your income that you
will invest each year up front. Now, many people know this; we've all heard about the virtues of
saving a minimum of 10 percent and investing it. But very few people do it—and, interestingly enough,
very few people are wealthy! The best way to insure that you'll be able to maintain your wealth is to
have 10 percent taken out of your paycheck and invested before you even see it.
To maintain your wealth, you must take control of your spending. But don't develop a budget;
develop a spending plan. How's that for Transformational Vocabulary? Truly, if a budget is done
effectively, it is a spending plan. It's a means for you—or if you're married, you and your spouse—to
decide what you want to spend money on in advance rather than get caught up in the moment. Too
often opportunities come up and out of a sense of urgency we make decisions that later on we regret.
I can also tell you that if you and your spouse get a clear plan for how much you need to spend each
month in each category of your life, you can save yourself a lot of arguments.
Unfortunately, most Americans live far beyond their means. In 1980, Americans owed over $54 billion
on credit cards. By the end of 1988, the total had more than tripled to over $172 billion! This is a
system that guarantees financial disaster. Be intelligent: spend less than you earn, and you will
maintain your wealth.
You may ask, "But won't my investments cause me to grow?" Yes, but you'll also have to deal with
inflation. You must go to the third step of creating lasting wealth.
3. The third key is to increase your wealth. How do you accomplish this? You add another simple
yet powerful factor to the equation I just explained. In order to become wealthy, you must spend less
than you earn, invest the difference, and reinvest your returns for compounded growth.
Most people have heard about the exponential power of compounding, but very few understand it.
Compounding allows you to put yourself in a position where your money goes to work for you. Most of
us work our entire lives to fuel the machines of our lifestyles. Those who succeed financially are those
who set aside a certain percentage of their money, invest it, and continue to reinvest their profits until
they produce a source of income that is large enough to provide for all their needs without ever having
to work again. We call this accumulation of capital that frees you from the necessity of work critical
mass. The pace at which you achieve your financial independence is in direct proportion to your
willingness to reinvest—not spend—the profits of your past investments. In this way, the "offspring" of
your dollars will grow and multiply until you have a solid economic base.
Let me offer you a simple and dramatic example of the power of compounding. If you fold a cloth
napkin (1/32 of an inch thick) upon itself once, how thick is it? Obviously, it is 1/16 of an inch. Folded
upon itself a second time, its thickness measures 1/8 of an inch. On the third fold, it equals 1/4 of an
inch. On the fourth, 1/2 of an inch, and by the fifth fold, the thickness equals 1 inch. Here's my
question for you: How many times would you need to fold this napkin upon itself (compound it) before
its thickness would touch the moon? Here's a clue: the moon is 237,305 miles away. Amazingly, you'd
reach the moon on the thirty-ninth fold. By your fiftieth fold, theoretically, the thickness of your napkin would be enough to go to the moon and back 1,179 times! This is the power of compounding. Most
people don't realize that a small amount of money compounded through time can be worth a fortune.
You might say, "This is wonderful. I'd love to begin compounding my investments, but how do I know
what to invest in?"
There is no simple answer to this question. You must first decide what your financial goals are. What
do you want to accomplish, and in what period of time? What's your risk tolerance, the amount of risk
that you're comfortable with? Without a clear understanding of your desires, your needs, and your
potential concerns, what to invest in is not clear. Often, would-be investors allow financial experts to
advise them even though these experts frequently have no idea what their clients' true needs are.
The most important thing you'll ever do in your financial life is to decide to truly understand the
various types of investments and what their potential risks and returns are. Responsible advisors will
make certain that all of their clients thoroughly understand the kinds of investments that are available
and that they take part in the development of their own financial plans. Without a clear-cut
investment plan, you will eventually fail financially. According to financial newsletter editor Dick
Fabian, "Evidence shows that investors—investors in anything—make no money over a ten-year period.
There are several reasons for this tragic statistic, including:
1) Not setting a goal;
2) Chasing after trendy investments;
3) Relying on reports from the financial press;
4) Blindly taking advice from brokers or financial planners;
5) Making emotional mistakes, and so on.
Fortunately, the answers to your financial questions are easily accessible. They're available in books
from the masters, from the Peter Lynches to the Robert Prechters to the Warren Buffets, and there are
effective financial coaches who can assist you in developing a plan that will help you to meet your
lifelong financial needs. Make certain, since finances play such a large role in the amount of pain or
pleasure you have in your life, that you model the best financial people. If you don't, you're going to
experience pain. If you do, you can have a level of financial abundance that's far beyond what you've
ever dreamed of before.
Now that you've really begun to create and expand your wealth, you're ready for the fourth key
element to financial success.
4. The fourth key is to protect your wealth. So many people who have wealth are equally or more
insecure today with an abundance of money than they were when they had none. People often feel
less secure when they think they have more to lose. Why? It's because they know that in any moment,
someone could sue them for completely unfair or unjust reasons, and decimate their assets.
Would you like to know how bad the current climate is in the United States? According to an article in
the London Financial Times, June 22, 1991, of all the lawsuits that were filed around the world in 1988
and 1989, a staggering 94 percent were filed in the United States alone. There are 18 million lawsuits
filed per year; in fact, current statistics from the American Bar Association show that if you live in
California and make more than $50,000 a year, there is almost a one-in-four chance that you will be
sued.

|

From the European perspective, it seems that Americans are always looking for someone to blame
when anything goes wrong, and this is the genesis of this incredible number of lawsuits. These are
harsh words, but, unfortunately, they're true. This attitude is not found anywhere else in the world,
and it is destroying our nation economically, tying up our time, capital, and energy in wasteful and
nonproductive ways. For example, as recently reported in The Wall Street Journal, a man who was
driving his vehicle while drunk tried to move the shotgun on the seat next to him, and it accidentally
discharged and killed him. His widow, rather than acknowledge her husband's inebriated state, sued
the shotgun manufacturer for $4 million on the grounds that the gun did not have safety devices for
drunk drivers, and won!
Knowing that the wealth that they've spent years of intense work to create could be claimed by people
who have no right to it understandably makes most people feel edgy. It makes them wary of the
liability of business and often impacts their follow-through on investment decisions.
However, the good news is that there are legal avenues for protecting your assets as long as you're
not currently involved in a lawsuit. This philosophy of protecting your assets is not one of trying to
avoid your legitimate debts, but simply to protect yourself from frivolous attacks.
People with dishonest motives will sue you for only one of two reasons: because they want a share of
your insurance, or they want to seize your assets. If there are no assets to touch, it's much more
difficult for them to retain an attorney based merely on a contingency fee. If you act judiciously in
advance, you can protect your assets, and the guidelines for doing so are very clear and concise.
In my quest to understand finances, I began to study the John Templetons of the world and began to
gain distinctions on how they structure their finances in a way that protects their assets from
illegitimate claims.
As in any situation in life, it's important to find out what the "big players" are doing, and model their
evaluation procedures and strategies. I spent two years pursuing and understanding the best assetprotection systems available in the United States for the doctor clientele of my Fortune Management
company. One common misperception is that asset protection involves mystery and deceit. The reality
is that honesty is the best policy. Your assets do not need to be hidden, just protected. If asset
protection is not a major concern for you today, it will be as you begin to build your wealth. Just know
that there are many things you can do to make changes in this area.
5. The fifth key is to enjoy your wealth. So many people have gone through the first four stages.
They've figured out how to earn wealth by adding real value. They've discovered how to maintain it by
spending less than they were earning. They've mastered the an of investing and are experiencing the
benefits of compounded interest. And they now know how to protect their assets, but they're still not
happy; they feel empty. The reason is that they have not yet realized that money is not the end; it's
only a means. You and I must make sure that we find a way to share its positive impact with the
people we care about, or the money will have no value. When you discover ways to contribute that are
proportionate to your income, you will tap into one of the greatest joys in life.
I can tell you that unless you link a certain level of pleasure to creating value and earning money,
you'll never keep it long term. Most people wait until they've accumulated a certain amount of money
to start enjoying themselves. This is a great way to teach your brain to link pain to wealth creation.
Instead, reward yourself emotionally along the way. Occasionally, you need to give yourself a jackpot
(as we talked about in Chapter 6), where you give yourself a financial surprise so that your brain is
taught that earning money is enjoyable and rewarding.
Also, remember the power and value of tithing. I can tell you that my financial world began to
turn around the day I gave a little more than twenty dollars to someone when I really didn't have the
twenty dollars to give. That day, I felt so good about myself that the feelings alone transformed my
performance and my capacity to earn even more. Most people say, "I'll tithe when I have more
money." But which do you think would be more difficult to do: to give a dime out of a dollar or to give
$100,000 out of a million? The answer is obvious, isn't it? I'm not suggesting that 10 percent is a
figure that should be etched in stone, but do make a commitment to consistently take a portion of
what you earn and give it in a way that gives you joy. The beauty of tithing is that by giving away
a portion of what you earn, you are teaching your brain that you have more than enough. You'll be
beyond scarcity, and that belief system alone will change your life.
True wealth is an emotion: it's a sense of absolute abundance220. Our heritage alone makes us
wealthy. We have the privilege of enjoying great works of art that we didn't paint, music we didn't
compose, great educational institutions we didn't build. Feel the wealth of the nation's parks that you
own. Know that you're a wealthy person now, and enjoy that wealth. Realize that this is a part of your
abundance, and this feeling of gratitude will allow you to create even more.
Let me simply say this to you in closing: changing your beliefs and mastering your finances can be an
incredibly rewarding experience in personal development. Commit yourself now to begin the process.
"Charity and personal force are the only investments."
WALT WHITMAN
Today's Assignment:
1. Take a look at your beliefs, see if there are any that are out of alignment, and change them with
NAC.
2. Institute a process for adding more value in your place of employment, on a major scale, whether
you're paid for it or not. Add ten times more value than you do currently and prepare for the
processional effects of your actions.
3. Commit to save a minimum of 10 percent, and have it deducted from your check and invested in
your planned portfolio.
4. Get some good coaching. Whether you contact our Financial Destiny Group professionals, or your
own local financial "coach," make certain that whoever works with you helps you to develop a detailed
financial plan that you understand. Pick up some great financial books. There are many that can teach
you how to make intelligent, informed investment decisions.
5. If you're concerned about your assets being under attack, take action to develop an asset-protection
plan.
6. Create a small jackpot to start the process of linking pleasure to financial success. Who could you do
something special for? What could you do for yourself as reinforcement for getting started today?
Now you're ready to ...

220

abundance Überfluss; Fülle; Überschwang
23
BE IMPECCABLE: YOUR CODE OF CONDUCT221

Your Outcome: Is it possible to have great values, to have all your rules aligned to support them, to be
asking yourself the right questions, and not to be living your values in the moment? If you're being
honest with yourself, you know the answer is yes. All of us at one time or another have let events
control us, instead of controlling our states or our decisions as to what those events mean. We need a
clear-cut way to ensure that we consistently live the values to which we've committed ourselves, and a
way of measuring whether or not we're actually achieving that value on a daily basis.

The young man had achieved enormous success by the time he was twenty-seven years old. He was
very bright, well-read, and he felt like he had the world by the tail. But one day he realized something:
he wasn't very happy.' Many people disliked him because they perceived him as haughty and
overbearing. He felt that he was no longer in command of his life's direction, much less his ultimate
destiny.
He decided that he would take control of his life by setting a higher standard for himself, developing a
strategy to achieve that higher standard, and creating a system so that he could measure his results
daily. He began by selecting twelve "virtues"—twelve states that he wanted to experience every day—
that he felt would take his life in the direction he wanted. Then he took out his journal and wrote down
all twelve states, and next to this list he created a grid of all the days of the month. "Every time I
violate any one of these virtues," he said, "I will put a small black dot next to that value for that day.
My goal is to have no black dots on my chart. Then I will know I am truly living these virtues."
He was so proud of his idea that he showed his journal and explained his system to a friend. His friend
said, "Great! Only I think you should add humility222 to your list of virtues." And Benjamin Franklin
laughed and added the 13th virtue to his list.
I remember reading this story from Ben Franklin's autobiography in a beat-up hotel room in Milwaukee.
I was on an intense schedule, facing the prospect of doing several radio and television talk shows, a
book signing, and a free guest event. The night before meeting all these obligations I decided, "Okay,
you're here, so make the best of it. At least you can feed your mind."
I had very recently come up with the idea of values and their hierarchies, and I had created what I
thought was a great list of values for myself, one that I felt good about living. But as I reflected upon
Ben's list of virtues, I told myself, "Yes, you have love as a value, but are you being loving right now?
Contribution is one of your top values, but are you contributing in this moment?" And the answer was
no. I had great values, but I wasn't measuring whether or not I was truly living them on a moment221

conduct 1. Führung; Verhalten, Betragen; 2. führen; PHYSIK leiten; MUSIK dirigieren; conducted tour
Führung (of durch)
to-moment basis. I knew I was a loving person, but as I looked back, I saw a lot of moments when I
wasn't being loving!
I sat down and asked myself, "What states would I be in if I were my highest and best? What
states will I commit to being every single day, no matter what? Regardless of the environment,
regardless of whatever challenges break loose around me, I will be these states at least once every
day!" The states to which I committed myself included being friendly, happy, loving, outgoing, playful,
powerful, generous, outrageous, passionate, and fun. Some of these states were the same as my
values, and some of them weren't. But I knew that if I truly lived each of these states every day, I
would be living my values continually. As you can imagine, it was a pretty exciting process!
The next day, as I appeared on the radio and TV talk shows, I deliberately put myself into these states.
I was happy, loving, powerful, funny, and I felt that what I said and did made a contribution, not only
to my hosts, but to the people who were listening and watching. Then I went down to the local
shopping mall for a book signing. When I got there, the manager approached me with a distressed
expression and said, "There's a slight problem, Mr. Robbins . . . the announcement that you're going to
be here signing books is coming out in tomorrow's paper!"
Now, if this had happened before I'd read about Ben Franklin's list, I might have reacted in a rather
unique way. But with my new list in mind I thought, "I'm committed to living in these states no matter
what. What a great test to see if I'm truly living my personal code every day!" , So I walked over to
the book-signing table and looked around. Nobody was there; only a few people were strolling through
the mall. How could I create excitement where none seemed to exist?
The first thing that popped into my mind was outrageousness. After all, one of the states on my list
was to be outrageous223. So I picked up a copy of my book. Unlimited Power, and started reading it
and making all kinds of interesting noises: "Ooooh! Aaaah! Wow, is that true?"
Soon a woman walked by, was attracted by my enthusiasm for what clearly had to be a brilliant book,
and stopped to see what I was reading. I raved to her about this incredible book, and pointed out all of
the best stories and techniques. Someone else stopped to see what all the hubbub was about, then a
few other folks joined us, and within around twenty minutes, about twenty-five to thirty people were
crowding around me to hear about the great book I had found.
Finally, I said, "And you know the best thing of all? I happen to be a good friend of the author!" The
first woman's eyes lit up: "Really?" I held up the book jacket with my picture on the back and said,
"Look familiar?" She gasped, and laughed, and so did all the other people. I sat down and started
signing books.
That afternoon turned out to be a terrific success, and all of us had fun. Instead of letting events
control my actions and perceptions, I had consciously chosen to live by what I now call my Code of
Conduct. I also had the tremendous sense of satisfaction of knowing that by living in these states—by
being who I truly am—I was meeting my values in the moment.
"Go put your creed224 into your deed225."
222
223
224

humility Demut
outrageous abscheulich; empörend, unerhört
creed Glaubensbekenntnis
RALPH WALDO EMERSON
Ben Franklin and I aren't the only people who have Codes of Conduct. What do you think the Ten
Commandments are all about? Or the Boy Scouts' Oath? Or the American Serviceman's Code of
Conduct? How about the Optimists' Club Creed? One way to create your own code is to review codes of
conduct that already exist. . . .

OPTIMISTS' CLUB CREED
Promise yourself...
To be so strong that nothing can disturb your peace of mind.
To talk health, happiness, prosperity to every person you meet.
To make all your friends feel that there is something of value in them.
To look at the sunny side of everything and make your optimism come true.
To think only the best, to work only for the best, and to expect the best.
To be just as enthusiastic about the success of others as you are about your own.
To forget the mistakes of the past and press on to the greater achievements of the future.
To wear a cheerful countenance at all times and give every living creature you meet a smile.
To give so much time to the improvement of yourself that you have no time to criticize others.
To be too large for worry, too noble for anger, too strong for fear, and too happy to permit presence of
trouble.

When John Wooden, the great UCLA basketball coach, graduated from grade school at age twelve, his
father gave him a seven-point creed. John says this creed has been one of the most powerful
influences on his entire life and career. It's a creed he still lives by every single day:

JOHN WOODEN'S SEVEN-POINT CREED:
"MAKING THE MOST OF ONESELF"
1. Be true to yourself.
2. Make each day your masterpiece.
3. Help others.
4. Drink deeply from good books.
5. Make friendship a fine art.
6. Build a shelter against a rainy day.
7. Pray for guidance and give thanks for your blessings every day.
"You can preach a better sermon226 with your life than with your lips."

225

deed Tat; Heldentat; RECHT (Übertragungs)Urkunde
sermon
RELIGION Predigt weiblich; (Moral-, Straf)Predigt weiblich

226
OLIVER GOLDSMITH
Today's Assignment:
1. Make a list of the states you are committed to experiencing every day in order to live in accordance
with your highest principles and values. Make sure the list is long enough to give your life the richness
and variety you deserve, yet short enough that you can truly be in these states every day! Most people
find that anywhere from seven to ten is optimum.
What states would you like to be in on a consistent basis? Happy? Dynamic? Friendly? Connected?
Cheerful? Grateful? Passionate? Balanced? Adventurous? Amusing? Outrageous? Generous? Elegant?
Some of these states might be the same as some of your moving-toward values, and some of them
might be things that you feel will lead you toward living your values every day.
2. After you have compiled your list, write a sentence next to each one describing how you will know
you are doing it—in other words, your rules for these states; for example: "I am being cheerful when I
smile at people"; "I am being outrageous when I do something totally unexpected and fun"; "I am
being grateful when I remember all the good things I have in my life."
3. Make the commitment to yourself to genuinely experience each of these states at least once a day.
You might want to write your Code of Conduct on a piece of paper and put it in your wallet or on your
desk at work or by your bed. Every now and then, during the course of the day, take a look at your list
and ask yourself, "Which of these states have I already experienced today? Which of them haven't I
had yet, and how am I going to accomplish it by the end of the day?"
If you truly commit to your Code of Conduct, imagine how incredible you will feel! You'll no longer be
controlled by events; you'll know that, no matter what happens around you, you can maintain your
sense of yourself and live up to the vision you've created. There is a tremendous pride that comes with
holding yourself to a higher standard and knowing that each day you alone will determine how you feel,
that you will conduct yourself only at the highest level.
Wayne Dyer recently shared a great metaphor with me relating to how people blame the way they
behave on the pressure they're feeling. He said, "Pressure doesn't create negative behavior. Think of
yourself as an orange. If an orange is squeezed, if all this pressure is being applied from the outside,
what happens? Juice comes out, right? But the only thing that comes out when the pressure is applied
is what's already inside the orange."
I believe that you decide what's on the inside by holding yourself to a higher standard. So when the
pressure's on, what's going to come out is the "good stuff." After all, you cannot always count on easy
sailing. It's up to you to live by your Code of Conduct and commit yourself to the principle of CANI! in
order to keep a true bearing on your course. Remember, it's who you are every day—the small actions
as well as the most grandiose—that build your character and form your identity.
One of the most important actions you can take is to learn to...
24
MASTER YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE – DAY SIX

Your Outcome: Learn how to use time to your advantage rather than allowing it to rule your levels of
satisfaction and stress.

If you've ever felt stress —and who hasn't?—chances are excellent that it's because you felt you just
didn't have enough time to do what you wanted to at the level of quality to which you were committed.
You could be feeling this frustration, for example, because you're focusing exclusively on the demands
of the moment: present requests, present challenges, present events. In this stressed and overloaded
state, your effectiveness is rapidly diminished. The solution is simple: Take control of the time frame
you're focusing upon. It the present is stressful, then become more resourceful in dealing with your
challenges by focusing on the future and the successful completion or resolution of the tasks before
you. This new focus will instantly change your state and give you the very resources you need to turn
things around in the present.
Stress is so often the result of feeling "stuck" in a particular time frame. One example of this is when a
person keeps thinking of their future in disempowering ways. You can help this person or yourself by
getting them to refocus on what they can control in the present. Or some people, when they're called
upon to take on a challenge, begin to focus exclusively on their past poor performance. As they remain
in the past, their stress increases. A shift to the present, or an anticipation of a positive future, could
instantly change their emotional state. Our emotions, then, are powerfully impacted by the time frame
in which we're operating at the moment.
So often we forget that time is a mental construct, that it is completely relative, and that our
experience of time is almost exclusively the result of our mental focus. How long is a long time, for
example? It all depends upon the situation, doesn't it? Standing in line for more than 10 minutes can
seem like an eternity, while an hour of making love can pass all too quickly.
Our beliefs also filter our perception of time. For some people, regardless of the situation, twenty
minutes is a lifetime. For others, a long time is a century. Can you imagine how these people walk
differently talk differently, look at their goals differently, and how stressed they might be if they were
trying to deal with one another while operating out of completely different frames of reference? This is
why time mastery is a life skill. The ability to flex your experience of time is the ability to shape your
experience of life.

{

For today's exercises, let's briefly review and apply three "time-saving" tips.
I. THE ABILITY TO DISTORT TIME
After you've mastered the ability to change time frames by changing your focus, you're ready to move
on to the second major skill of time mastery, and that is the ability to distort time so that a minute
feels like an hour, or an hour like a minute. Haven't you noticed that when you become totally
engrossed in something, you lose track of time? Why? Because you no longer focus upon it. You make
fewer measurements of it. You're focused on something enjoyable and, therefore, time passes more
rapidly. Remember that you're in control. Direct your focus and consciously choose how to measure
your time. If you are constantly checking your watch, then time seems to crawl. Once again, your
experience of time is controlled by your focus. How do you define your use of time? Are you spending
it, wasting it, or killing it? It's been said that "killing time is not murder; it's suicide."
II. A MATTER OF IMPORTANCE
The third, and perhaps the most critical distinction of all, is an understanding of how urgency and
importance control your decisions about what to do with your time, and therefore your level of
personal fulfillment. What do I mean? Let me ask you this: Have you ever worked your tail off,
completed every single thing on your "to do" list, but at the end of the day still felt unfulfilled? That's
because you did everything that was urgent and demanded your attention in the moment, but you
didn't do what was important—the things that would make a difference long-term. Conversely, have
you ever had days when you got only a few things done but at the end felt that this was a day that
had really mattered? These are the days when you've focused on what's important rather than what
urgently needed your attention. Urgency seems to control our lives. The phone rings, and we're doing
something important, but we "have to" pick it up. After all, what if we missed out on something? This
is a classic example of handling what's urgent—after all, you might miss out on a high-powered phone
conversation with a computerized surveyor! On the other hand, we buy a book that we know can make
a difference in our lives, yet put off reading it time and again because we "just can't squeeze it in"
between opening the mail, filling the gas tank, and watching the news on TV. The only way to truly
master your time is to organize your schedule each day to spend the majority of it doing things that
are important rather than urgent.
III. SAVE YOURSELF YEARS
The most powerful way I've learned to compress time is to learn through other people's experience.
We can never truly master time as long as our primary strategy for learning and mastering our world
is based upon trial and error. Modeling those who've already succeeded can save you years of pain.
This is why I'm a voracious reader and a committed student of tapes and seminars. I've always seen
these experiences as necessities, not accessories, and they have given me the wisdom of decades of
experience and the success that results from it. I challenge you to learn from other people's
experiences as often as you can, and to utilize whatever you learn.
"We have time enough if we will but use it aright."
JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
Today's Assignment:
1. Throughout this day, begin to explore changing time frames. Whenever you're feeling the pressures
of the present, stop and think about the future in ways that are empowering. For example, think of
goals that compel you, and become fully associated to them. Visualize the image, listen to it, step into
it and notice how it feels. Put yourself back into the midst of a treasured memory: your first kiss, the
birth of your child, a special moment with a friend. The more you develop your capability to quickly
change time frames, the greater your level of freedom and the range of emotions you will be able to
create within your at a moment's notice. Do this enough until you truly know you can this change in
focus to instantly change your state.
2. Learn to deliberately distort time. For something that normally seems to take a long time to
complete, add another component that will not only speed up your perception of time, but allow you to
accomplish two things at once. For example, when I'm running, I'll don a pair of headphones and listen
to my favorite music. Or I'll watch the news or make phone calls while I'm on my StairMaster. This
means I'll never have an excuse not to exercise, not to do what's important: working out and I
returning my calls.
3. Write a "to do" list that prioritizes according to importance instead of urgency. Instead of writing
down zillions of things to do and feeling like a failure at the end of the day, focus on what's most
important for you to accomplish. If you do this, I can promise you that you'll feel a sense of
satisfaction and accomplishment few experience.
Of course, we must always take time to ...
25
REST AND PLAY: EVEN GOD TOOK ONE DAY OFF! DAY SEVEN

Your Outcome: Achieve some balance.

You've worked hard and you've played hard. Take a day off to have some fun! Be spontaneous, be
outrageous, do something that takes you outside yourself. What would create the most excitement for
you?
"The great man is he that does not lose his child's-heart."
MENCIUS
Today's Assignment:
1. Either plan something fun and stick to it, or do something on the spur of the moment. Whatever it is,
enjoy it!
Tomorrow, you'll be ready to explore . . .
PART FOUR
A LESSON IN DESTINY
26
THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE: WHAT ONE PERSON CAN DO

"A mighty flame followeth a tiny spark."
—DANTE

He knew he must stop them. With a mere $800 in his pocket, Sam LaBudde drove across the Mexican
border, stood on the fishing docks of Ensenada, and waited for his opportunity. Toting a video camera
to get some "home movies" of his excursion, he posed as a naive American tourist and offered his
services as a deckhand or engineer to each captain who docked his boat in the harbor.
He was hired on the Maria Luisa as a temporary crew member, and as the Panamanian tuna boat
pulled away from the Mexican coast, La-Budde began to secretly film the activities of the crew. He
knew that if he were discovered his life would be in jeopardy.
Finally it happened: they were surrounded. A whole school of dolphins, known to many as "water
people," began jumping and chattering near the Maria Luisa. Their friendly nature had drawn them to
the boat; little did they know that they were also being drawn to their death. The fishermen trailed the
dolphins because they knew that yellowfin tuna usually swim below the playful creatures. With coldblooded calculation, they lay their nets in the path of the dolphins, not noticing or even caring
what happened to them.
Over the course of five hours, LaBudde's video recorded the horror. One after another, dolphins
became entangled in the nets, unable to free themselves and come to the surface for the oxygen they
needed to stay alive.
At one point the captain bellowed, "How many in the net!?"* As LaBudde swung to capture the
slaughter on video, he heard a crew member yell, "About fifty!" The captain ordered the crew to haul
in their catch. Numerous dolphins lay strangled and lifeless on the slippery deck as the crew separated
them from the tuna and discarded their sleek, gray bodies. Eventually, the corpses of these
magnificent animals were tossed overboard as casually as sacks of garbage. LaBudde's footage gave
clear-cut evidence of what others had claimed for years: that hundreds of dolphins were regularly
being killed in a single day's fishing expedition. Estimates are that over six million dolphins have been
killed in the last ten years alone. Edited down to an eleven-minute format, LaBudde's video stunned
viewers with the heart-wrenching reality of what we were doing to these intelligent and affectionate
beings with whom we share our planet. One by one, outraged consumers across the nation stopped
buying tuna, launching a boycott that only gained speed as media attention became more pointed.
Just four years after LaBudde first captured the tragedy on film, in 1991 the world's largest tuna
canner, Starkist, announced that it would no longer pack tuna caught in purse seine nets. Chicken of
the Sea and Bumblebee Seafoods followed suit, issuing similar statements just hours later. While the
fight is not over—unregulated foreign tuna boats still kill six times as many dolphins as did the U.S.
boats—LaBudde's day on the Maria Luisa has served as a catalyst for major reform in the American
tuna industry, saving countless dolphin lives and undoubtedly helping to restore some balance to the
marine ecosystem.
"Every man is an impossibility until he is born."
RALPH WALDO EMERSON
So many people feel powerless and insignificant when it comes to social issues and world events,
thinking that even if they did everything right in their own personal lives, their welfare would still be at
the mercy of the actions of others. They feel beset by the proliferation of gang warfare and violent
crime, perplexed by massive government deficits and the S&L crisis, saddened by homelessness and
illiteracy, and overwhelmed by global warming and the relentless extinction of the other species who
live on this planet. Such people fall into the mindset of thinking, "Even if I get my own life and the
lives of my family in order, what good will it do? Some nut in a position of power could accidentally
push the button and blow us all up anyway!" This kind of belief system fosters the feeling of being out
of control and impotent to create change at any significant level, and naturally leads to the learned
helplessness typified by the phrase, "Why even try?"
Nothing could be more crippling to a person's ability to take action than learned
helplessness; it is the primary obstacle that prevents us from changing our lives or taking
action to help other people change theirs. If you've come this far in the book, you know without a
doubt my central message: you have the power right now to control how you think, how you
feel, and what you do. Perhaps for the first time you are empowered to take control of the Master
System that has unconsciously guided you until this point. With the strategies and distinctions you've
gained from reading and doing the exercises in this book, you have awakened to the conviction that
you are truly the master of your fate, the director of your destiny.
Together we've discovered the giant power that shapes destiny—decision—and that our decisions
about what to focus on, what things mean, and what to do are the decisions that will determine the
quality of our present and future.
Now it's time to address the power of joint decisions to shape the destiny of our community, our
country, and our world. What will determine the quality of life for generations to come will be the
collective decisions we make today about how to deal with such current challenges as widespread drug
abuse, the imbalance of trade, ineffective public education, and the shortcomings of our prison system.
By fixating on everything that's not working, we limit our focus to effects, and we neglect the causes of
these problems. We fail to recognize that it is the small decisions you and I make every day
that create our destinies. Remember that all decisions are followed by consequences. If we make
our decisions unconsciously—that is, let other people or other factors in our environment do the
thinking for us—and act without at least anticipating the potential effects, then we may be unwittingly
perpetuating the problems we dread most. By trying to avoid pain in the short term, we often end up
making decisions that create pain in the long term, and when we arrive further down the river we tell
ourselves that the problems are permanent and unchangeable, that they come with the territory.
Probably the most pervasive false belief most of us harbor is the fallacy that only some superhuman
act would have the power to turn our problems around. Nothing could be further from the truth. Life is
cumulative. Whatever results we're experiencing in our lives are the accumulation of a host of small
decisions we've made as individuals, as a family, as a community, as a society, and as a species. The
success or failure of our lives is usually not the result of one cataclysmic event or earth-shaking
decision, although sometimes it may look that way. Rather, success or failure is determined by the
decisions we make and the actions we take every day.
By the same token, then, it is the daily decisions and actions of each one of us, taking responsibility on
an individual level, that will truly make the difference in such matters as whether we are able to take
care of our disadvantaged and whether we can learn to live in harmony with our environment. In order
to bring about massive and far-reaching changes, both in our individual and joint destinies, it is
necessary to commit ourselves to constant and never-ending improvement, to the discipline of CANI!
Only in that way can we truly make a difference that will last in the long term.

THE ULTIMATE SOLUTION
What do you suppose is the one common element in all the problems facing us today as a nation and
as a world? From soaring numbers of homeless people to escalating crime rates to huge budget deficits
to the slow strangulation of our ecosystem, the answer is that every single one of these problems
was caused or set in motion by human behavior. Therefore, the solution to every one of
these problems is to change our behavior. (This requires changing the way we evaluate or make
decisions, which is what this entire book is about.) We don't have a drug problem; we have a behavior
problem. Teenage pregnancy is not the result of a virus. It is the consequence of specific behavior.
Gang warfare is a behavioral problem. Even nuclear war is ultimately a behavioral problem! Our
decisions built the bombs, and our decisions will eliminate them. All of these problems are the
result of actions that people have chosen to take.
For example, when an individual becomes a gang member, that single decision sets in motion a whole
series of behaviors and problems. With this new gang identity, he will hold himself to a very specific
code of behavior which places utmost value on such things as loyalty to the group, and out of that
flows a whole system of characteristic rules and behaviors. A global example of the long-term effects
of our decisions is the chronic famines and food shortages that take the lives of so many around the
world. The World Health Organization has proven that it is possible to feed every man, woman, and
child on this earth, yet every day, 40,000 children die of starvation. Why? Obviously we have the
resources, but something has gone terribly awry, not only with the way food is distributed, but with
the way our resources are used.
What's great about all of this? The good news is that once we realize that the root of all problems is
behavior (and the decision-making process we use to initiate it), then we know that we are the ones
who can change it! As you've learned in this book, the one thing we have absolute control over is
our internal world—we decide what things mean and what to do about them—and as a result
of our decisions, we take actions that impact our external environment. There are actions each and
every one of us can take in our own homes, our own businesses, and our own communities that will
initiate a chain of specific positive consequences. With our actions, we communicate our most
deeply held values and beliefs, and through the global influence of our mass media, even the
simplest actions we take have the power to influence and move people of all nations.
While this sounds encouraging for the human race, you may be asking yourself, "What can one person
do to truly make a difference in the world?" Virtually anything.' The only limit to your impact is your
imagination and commitment. The history of the world is simply the chronicle of what has happened
because of the deeds of a small number of ordinary people who had extraordinary levels of
commitment to making a difference. These individuals did little things extraordinarily well. They
decided that something must change, that they must be the ones to do it, and that they could do it—
and then they summoned the courage to persist until they found a way to make it work. These are the
men and women we call heroes.
I believe that you and I—and everyone we'll ever meet—has the inborn capacity to be heroic, to take
daring, courageous, and noble steps to make life better for others, even when in the short term it
seems to be at our own expense. The capacity to do the right thing, to dare to take a stand and make
a difference, is within you now. The question is: When the moment arrives, will you remember
you're a hero and selflessly respond in support of those in need?
"It was involuntary; they sank my boat."
JOHN F. KENNEDY, when asked how he'd become a hero
So many people want to avoid any hint of a problem or challenge, yet surmounting difficulty is the
crucible that forms character. Many people don't discover their heroic nature until a major difficulty
or life-threatening situation occurs and they must rise to the occasion because there is no other choice.
The next time you find yourself in a tough spot, decide to make a difference in that situation and take
action, no matter how small it seems at the time. Who knows what consequences you will set in
motion? Identify yourself as a hero so that you can act as one.
Many people look at a person like Mother Teresa and assume that she was born to heroism. They claim
that she's just an incredibly spiritual woman and that she's always been set apart by her commitment
and selfless contribution to the poor. While it is true that she is a woman of extraordinary courage and
compassion, it is also true that Mother Teresa had some crucial moments that defined her role as one
of the great contributors of our time. Mother Teresa did not set out to help the poor. In fact, for over
twenty years she taught the wealthiest children in Calcutta, India. Every day she overlooked the
impoverished slums that surrounded the well-to-do neighborhood in which she worked, never
venturing outside her tiny sphere of influence.
One night, as she was walking down the street, she heard a woman
crying out for help. It was in the moment that this dying woman fell into
her arms that Mother Teresa's life changed forever.
Realizing the seriousness of the woman's condition, Mother rushed
her to the hospital, where she was told to sit and wait. She knew the
woman would die without immediate attention, so she took her to another hospital. Again, she was told to wait; the woman's social caste made
her less important than the others being treated. Finally, in desperation,
Mother Teresa took the woman home. Later that night, she died in the
comfort of Mother Teresa's loving arms.
Mother Teresa's "defining moment" had transpired: the moment
when she decided that (his would never happen again to anyone within her
reach. From that moment on she decided that she would devote her life
to easing the pain of those who suffered around her and that, whether
they lived or died, they would do so with dignity. She would personally
do everything in her power to see that they would be treated better than
they had ever been treated their entire lives, with the love and respect
that all people deserve.
"Let the word go forth from this time and place, to
friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed
to a new generation of Americans, bom in this
century, tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and
bitter peace, proud of our ancient heritage, and
unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do

491

those human rights to which this nation has always
been committed, and to which we are committed
today, at home, and around the world.
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or
ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden,
meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any
foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty."
—JOHN F. KENNEDY
Many people today seem to shy away from the very idea of being a hero,
perhaps avoiding the responsibility they feel it would entail. Besides,
aren't such aspirations egotistical? Isn't all heroism false anyway? After
all, no one's perfect. Today we live in a society where we not only
overlook potential heroes, but we denigrate the ones we have. With
morbid fascination, we scrutinize their private lives, digging for some
chink in their armor, and eventually we find it—or fabricate one. In every
campaign race, people complain about the caliber of the candidates, yet
they systematically pursue evidence of even the slightest indiscretions of
a candidate's past behavior, even to the extent of focusing on the fact that
a potential Supreme Court Justice once smoked a marijuana cigarette
decades ago!
If we held the great heroes of our past to the same unbending criteria
by which we judge our present-day heroes, we wouldn't have any heroes'
The Kennedys and the Kings would have had difficulty withstanding
today's tabloid mentality. It seems that we're so afraid of being let down
that we try to find something wrong to begin with—just so we're not
disappointed later. As long as we operate from the frame that all heroes
have feet of clay, then clearly we must believe that there is something
wrong with all of us, that none of us has what it takes or is "good enough"
to be a hero.
How do I define a hero? A hero is a person who courageously
contributes under even the most trying circumstances; a hero is an
individual who acts unselfishly and who demands more from himself
or herself than others would expect; a hero is a man or woman who
defies adversity by doing what he or she believes is right in spite of
fear. A hero moves beyond the "common sense" of the promoters of the
status quo. A hero is anyone who aims to contribute, anyone who is
willing to set an example, anyone who lives by the truth of his or her
convictions. A hero develops strategies to assure his outcome, and persists until it becomes a reality, changing his approach as necessary and
understanding the importance of small actions consistently taken. A hero
is not someone who is "perfect," because none of us is perfect. We all
make mistakes, but that doesn't invalidate the contributions we make in
the course of our lives. Perfection is not heroism; humanity is.
THE CHALLENGE OF HOMELESSNESS
Knowing that within each of us flickers the spark of heroism, just waiting
to be fanned into a mighty flame, how can we tackle a giant social issue
such as the plight of our country's homeless population? The first key to
changing this situation is to hold ourselves to a higher standard. We
must decide that, as the richest country on earth, we are no longer willing
to settle for having so many of our men, women, and children cast out on
the streets like human refuse.
What percentage of our population is homeless? At this writing the
results of the 1990 census on the homeless have not been fully tabulated.
In fact, by the very nature of homelessness—the people involved have no
address—exact figures are difficult to obtain. The most commonly cited
statistics estimate that at least 3 million of our citizens are homeless, or

,|
roughly one in every 100 people live on the streets or in shelters.*
The second key to addressing this problem is to change our beliefs.
We must stop believing that these problems are a permanent malaise
pervading our country and that there is nothing that any individual can
do to truly make a difference. The way to break free of learned helplessness is to adopt the belief that, as an individual, you can make a difference, and that in fact all great reform movements have been carried out
by committed individuals;
Another belief we must change is that the homeless are in their
current situation because they are all "mentally deranged." Again, statistics cannot be precise, but it is estimated that between 16 percent and 22
percent of the homeless suffer some form of mental illness.f In order to
really help these people, we must break through our stereotypes. Generalizing about the homeless does not empower us to help them, and
beyond a shadow of a doubt, many can be helped.
What causes homelessness in the first place? Besides the alreadymentioned mental illness, other reasons commonly cited include the spiraling cost of housing coupled with diminishing income, drug or alcohol
abuse, and the breakdown of the traditional American family. The truth is
* Snyder, Mitch, and Mary Ellen Hombs, "Homelessness Is Serious," David L Bender, ed.. The
Homeless: Opposing Viewpoints, Greenhaven Press, © 1990.
t Ibid.
493
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
that all of these are legitimate reasons. Yet underlying them all are belief
systems. After all, there are plenty of people who have also survived the
ravages of drug and alcohol abuse, who have lost their homes or can't even
earn enough to pay the rent, and who have never experienced a stable
family life—yet these people never became homeless.
What's the difference? It all comes down to the basic beliefs, values, and identity of each individual. Many who are on the streets may
see themselves as "homeless" people; but others may see themselves as
being "temporarily without a home." Thus they pursue solutions and will
find a way back into the traditional lifestyle. To create long-term change
for a homeless individual, there must be a change in identity. This is
the only way to produce a consistent change in their behavior.
Since 1984,1 have worked with homeless organizations in the South
Bronx, Brooklyn, Hawaii, and San Diego, assisting people in making the
transformation from "homeless person" to "societal contributor." Each
year in my Mastery programs, participants spend an evening with several
homeless people to facilitate change and help them turn their lives
around. The results of these one-hour interactions are often astounding.
One terrific example of this is a young man named T. J. We first met
him two years ago, when we brought him in off the street and invited him
to have dinner with us if he'd share a little bit of his life story. At the time,
he says, he was "high as a kite." He had been living on the street for over
ten years, addicted to cocaine, methadone, and amphetamines. After
spending a mere hour with him, the seminar participants I had trained
were able to help him make huge shifts in his beliefs and assist him in
developing strategies to support his new identity.
Today, T. J. is not only off the street and off drugs, but he is also a
major contributor to society—he is a fireman in Texas. In fact, for the last
two years he has returned to our program to help us recruit and assist
others who are in the same position he was in only a couple of years ago.
In interviewing homeless people, I've found that many of them are
just like T. J. They have drug or alcohol problems, or they have lost their
homes and don't know how to cope with the situation. Most of their
challenges are not unlike many other people's. They have neuroassociations that limit them; they have values that preclude a change;
some of their rules keep them from moving forward; their identity ties
them to their limiting circumstances. Since freedom tends to be one of
their highest values, they feel happy in spite of their dissatisfaction with
their physical environment. After all, they don't have to play by society's
rules, and they avoid the pressures they associate with those rules. Besides, they've built up a whole community of friends, and they often see
themselves as being "strong" because they survive by their wits. Often
they think it builds character. I've even met people who used to be
homeless and now have homes, yet they spend time in shelters because
they still identify so completely with their homeless persona.
Through our friendship and caring, you and I can be the bridge
between the harsh reality of homelessness and the challenge of personal
responsibility that rejoining society requires. We all act upon what we
feel is compelling. What would happen if you cultivated a friendship
with a homeless person and offered this individual some new reference
experiences, like a visit to the spa or the theater? New references provide
the fabric for new beliefs and new identities. Remember, small efforts can
make a big difference.
THE CHALLENGES FACING OUR PRISON
SYSTEM
We have equally disturbing challenges in our prisons. It doesn't take a
genius to see that our current incarceration system is ineffective, with a
recidivism rate of 82 percent. Of all federal and state inmates in 1986,60
percent had been in prison two or more times, 45 percent three or more
times, and 20 percent six or more times.*
In the last five years, our prison population has swollen in size,
creating the stresses that come with massive overcrowding. To relieve the
pressure, many inmates are abruptly released with $200 in their pockets,
sent away from a system they hate yet have learned to rely upon for a
sense of certainty and security.
Clearly they have not learned how to change their system of decision
making. Living in an environment where you must pay someone just so
you won't be physically harmed or sexually abused, where you must steal
or join a gang to survive, does not enhance your view of yourself or your
world. Inmates are driven to maintain their criminal identity in order to
survive in the prison society, where acknowledgment and prestige are
earned by a savage set of rules.
As one ex-convict shared with me, "As soon as I was released, I
started thinking about going back. After all, I knew no one on the
outside. In the joint I had respect. I had guys that would kill for me. On
the outside, I was just a worthless ex-con." Sent out into a world where
they know no one, thinking that they have no way to control their own
environment, these men and women often do things—consciously or
unconsciously—to ensure return to their "home."
* Wright, John W., ed.. The Universal Almanac, Andrews and McMeel, ® 1989.
495
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
Can this cycle of criminality be interrupted? Of course it can—if
there is enough pain linked to being in prison, and enough pleasure
to being outside of it. If we could train people effectively, the combination of these factors would be amazing. Recently, I interviewed a man
who had just been released after serving eight years for attempted murder. When I asked him if he'd shoot someone again, he smiled and said,
"In a heartbeat—if anyone tried to take my drugs." I asked, "Don't you
want to avoid going back to prison?" He said, "No! Prison's not so bad.
There, I didn't have to worry about my next meal. And I got to watch TV.
And I really had things wired; I knew how to deal with all the other guys,
so I never really had to worry." Prison is not a deterrent to his sociopathic
behavior. He simply doesn't associate pain to incarceration.
Now contrast this with the experiences of Frank Abagnale, author of
the book Catch Me If You Can. He is world famous for his antics as "the
great imposter," traveling around the world posing as a Pan Am airline
pilot, a hospital administrator, an aide to the attorney general of Louisiana, among other guises, and conning people out of millions of dollars.
Today, Frank is one of the foremost experts in bank security systems and
a contributor to his community.
What turned him around? Pain. As the result of one of his escapades,
he was arrested and incarcerated in a French prison. No one threatened
him with physical or sexual abuse, but the pain was incredibly intense.
First, he spent his entire sentence in a dark cell and totally isolated from
all contact with the outside world: no television, no newspapers, no
radio, no conversation with other inmates or guards. Second, they gave
him absolutely no idea when he'd be released. He didn't have a clue whether
he'd be held there for sixty days or sixty years.
The pain of not knowing—the sense of uncertainty—was the severest
form of punishment imaginable, and Frank linked so much pain to this
"hell on earth" that he vowed he'd never return. And you know what?
He's not alone. Not surprisingly, French prisons have a recidivism rate of
1 percent and spend about $200 on each prisoner annually (an even
more astounding figure when you consider that Americans spend about
$30,000 a year on our prisoners, and perpetuate an 82 percent recidivism rate!).
Am I suggesting that we duplicate the French penal system? No, all
I'm saying is that the system we have in place is obviously not working
and that it's time to try something else. We must provide our prisoners
with an environment in which they don't have to constantly worry about being beaten or attacked by
cellmates, yet at the same time we cannot make prison the home they never had. I'm suggesting that
prison terms should be undesirable—uncomfortable—and that during a
prison term, people should be shown ways to make the outside world
an experience that they can be in control of, one of pleasure and possibility, so that when they're released, it's something they pursue rather
than fear. They must link pain to being in prison, and pleasure to
changing. Otherwise, the behavior that landed them in jail will never
be modified long-term.
Above all, a prisoner must know that someone cares about him and
is committed to offering him strategies that will steer his life in a new
direction. Not all prisoners are ready for change, but those who are
clearly deserve our support.
"While there is a lower class I am in it; while there
is a criminal element I am of it; while there is a soul
in prison, I am not free."
—EUGENE VICTOR DEBS
What can you do? One simple yet profound action would be to commit
once a month to visiting a prisoner who has truly decided to change
the quality of his life. Become a loving, supportive friend and show
him or her the choices available. I'll never forget the relationship I developed as a result of volunteering to visit with an inmate of the Chino,
California prison. Through my assistance and encouragement, he began
running up to three miles a day, reading inspirational and instructional
books, and beginning the transition from "prisoner" to "valued person."
When he was released two years later, the sense of connection and
contribution we shared was one of the more rewarding experiences of
my life.
THE CHALLENGE OF GANG VIOLENCE
While adult crime is a demanding problem indeed, we also need to
address the question of how we can stem the flow of our youth into
the juvenile penal system. What about the senseless murders that are
being committed every day by young gang members in the inner cities?
The unrelenting savagery of two gangs that originated in Los Angeles
and then spread across the nation—the Crips and the Bloods—has
taken an unfathomable toll on the cities in which they live, and most
of us are at a loss as to how to address this frightening problem. I'm
certain, however, that one of the first things that must happen is to
get gang members to rethink their rules. Remember, all of our actions
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do

497

stem from our core beliefs about what we must and must never do
or be.
I recently read a Rolling Stone article excerpting a book focusing on
the day-to-day life of gang members.* This "slice of life" details a gang
class held at a juvenile hall called Camp Kilpatrick. When the students
(gang members) were asked why they would kill someone, they rapidly
fired off a list of thirty-seven reasons. These are a few of those I found
most shocking: if someone loofes at me funny, if someone asks me where
I'm /rom, /or a nickel, if someone walks /unny, if someone touches my food
(for example, takes a french fry), for fun, if someone gives me a bad haircut.
With such aberrant rules—rules that almost no one else in the society shares—it is no surprise how volatile these young men and
women are. They have more reasons to kill than virtually anyone, and
thus they act in accordance with their rules. What was encouraging to
me, though, was to see that the facilitator understood the power of
questions to weaken even the most strongly held beliefs. He asked,
"For which of these things would you be willing to die?" In other
words, if you knew that by killing someone for a bad haircut you
would also die, would you still do it?
By asking this question, he got them to reevaluate their rules and to
reconsider the importance of those things for which they'd previously
been willing to murder. By the time he was done with this questioning
process, these gang members had radically changed their rules. Instead of family, and for association
(gang). The latter remained only because one
young man persisted in believing that this was perhaps the most important thing in his life. Whenever any of the other kids tried to dissuade
him, he simply insisted, "Y'all don't know me." His identity was a conviction, one so tied to his gang that surrendering it would mean surrendering his whole sense of self—probably the only thing constant in this
young man's life.
By pursuing this method of asking and answering questions, this
"school" is getting through to many of the kids who take the course. It is
weakening the reference legs of destructive beliefs until these kids no
longer feel certain about them. Remember, all behaviors can be
changed by changing beliefs, values, rules, and identity. Obviously
the conditions that produce the gangs in the first place need to be
addressed—ultimately, this too can be handled through modifying behavior at the level where it counts, case by case.
•

King, Leon, "Do or Die," Rolling Stone, September 1991.

THE CHALLENGES FACING OUR
ENVIRONMENT
The environment is no longer just a rallying cause for the counterculture,
but has come to the forefront as a major national and international
concern. After four of the hottest consecutive years ever recorded in
history, people have become extremely concerned about global
warming—the phenomenon caused by excess carbon dioxide that is
trapped by the ozone layer, resulting in rising temperatures. What are the
major sources? One of them is the fluorocarbons found in air conditioners and spray bottles. Another major source of the global-warming effect
is the wanton destruction and burning of our Central and South American rainforests. Rainforests account for an astounding 80 percent of
the earth's vegetation, and are critical to our ecosystem.*
Trees absorb the toxic gases of excess carbon dioxide that we release
into the atmosphere, and convert it to breathable oxygen. Trees are our
ultimate rejuvenators: without them, life on earth as we know it
could not exist. Rainforest trees also provide an environment for the
largest diversity of animal and insect species in the world. By burning
our rainforests, not only do we destroy the oxygen-producing vegetation and the environment in which the animals and plants live, but
we release huge amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere'and
hasten the deleterious global-warming effect.
With all their importance, why are the rainforests being cleared so
relentlessly? The answer is a simple matter of pain and pleasure: economics. Huge tax breaks have been given in these countries as incentives
for ranchers to clear the land. Is it to make room for more housing? Of
course not. It's to clear grazing land for cattle to be exported as beef to the
United States. This nation imports 10 percent of its beef from Central and
South America.f In order to meet this need, rainforests are being eliminated at a pace of one acre every five seconds.^
The inefficiency of the use of this land for grazing is one of the most
destructive, short-term decisions that man can make. We're bulldozing
the source of our survival. Do you realize that every time you buy a
quarter-pound hamburger using rainforest beef, it represents the destruction of fifty-five square feet of tropical rainforest?** Once destroyed, it
can never be replaced. Further, the current rate of species extinction is
* Robbins, John, Diet/or a New America.
t "Acres, USA," vol 15 #6, June 1985, cited in J. Robbins.
f Robbins, John, Diet for a New America.
•• "The Fate of Our Planet," Robbins Research Report, Fall 1990, Robbins Research International,
Inc. © 1991.
499
The Ultimate Challenge; What One Person Can Do
1,000 per year due to the destruction of the rainforests—an unimaginable
assault on our ecosystem.
What's the point of it all? It's solely for the purpose of cycling more
meat through our bodies, which medical science has already established
is directly related to the top killers in this nation: heart disease and
cancer. The shocking statistic is that one out of two Americans dies of
some form of heart disease—Russian roulette gives you better odds of
survival than following the standard American diet! Ultimately, we cannot destroy the external environment without destroying our own
internal environment.
Do you want to stop the destruction of our rainforests? Do you want
to help restore the delicate balance of our ecosystem? In addition to
sending your financial support to environmental organizations like
Greenpeace, the most powerful thing you can do is to link pain to any of
your personal behaviors that perpetuate the ill use of our planet. Clearly,
one step would be to reduce or eliminate your consumption of hamburger meat. A boycott worked with the tuna industry, and it can work
here as well. We're not just talking about dollars and cents. The earth
itself is at stake. Know that the decisions you make about what to put
on your dinner plate determine, in a small yet undeniable way, such
things as how much carbon dioxide is released into our atmosphere
and how many plant and animal species will die each day.
Now let's look at the impact of your dietary decisions on a local level.
Perhaps you live in a state, like I do, that is experiencing a severe water
shortage. In fact, it's been said that in the twenty-first century water will
be the gold of the future, one of our most valuable and scarce resources.
How can this be true, on a planet that is predominantly covered with
water? The reason can be found in our incredibly poor management of
this vital resource. Specifically, it's related to the meat industry. Consider
this: the amount of water that is used to raise one single steer is
enough to float an American destroyer!* In California, we're all working hard to conserve water, taking steps such as not watering our lawns
and installing flow restrictors in our toilets and shower heads. All of these
actions are important, but did you know that it takes 5,214 gallons of
water to produce one pound of California beef?f This means that you
can save more water by not eating one pound of beef than you could
by skipping showers for an entire year!^ According to Comell economist David Fields and his associate Robin Hur, "Every dollar that state
* "The Browning of America," Newsweek, February 22, 1981, cited in J. Robbins.
t "The Fate of Our Planet," Robbins Research Report.
^ This figure assumes a total of 5,200 gallons of water used by a person taking 5 showers a week,
5 minutes per shower, with a flow rate of 4 gallons per minute. Robbins, John, Diet/or a New
America.
governments dole out to livestock producers, in the form of irrigation
subsidies, actually costs taxpayers over seven dollars in lost wages, higher
living costs, and reduced business income."* What can one person do to
save more water? The answer seems obvious to me: cut your meat consumption.
Here's something else for you to chew on. Did you know that more
energy is consumed by the beef industry than any other single industry in the United States?! The percentage of all raw materials that
the United States devotes to the production of livestock is a staggering
one-third of all energy consumption, and the fossil fuel required to
produce one pound of beef is roughly thirty-nine times that required
to produce the equivalent protein value in soybeans. If you wanted to
save energy, it would be wiser to drive your car to the restaurant down
the block than if you walked there, fueled by the calories you consumed
frofn a quarter-pound of beef or chicken raised by the energy-inefficient
standard of the industry.
Are you concerned about nuclear power plants? If we were to reduce by 50 percent our meat consumption, we could totally eliminate our reliance on nuclear power throughout the United States, as
well as significantly or completely reduce our reliance on foreign oil
imports, f
One final issue we're all concerned about is world hunger. With 60
million people dying every year of starvation, clearly it's time for lis to
examine just how efficiently we're utilizing our resources. Remember, all
decisions have consequences, and unless we have some understanding of
the long-term impact on our planet, we will make poor decisions.
The amount of food produced on any prime acre of land is markedly
reduced when that food is beef. The same acre of land that would
produce 250 pounds of beef would produce 40,000 pounds of
potatoes—roughly the difference between feeding one person, and
160 persons!** The same resources that are used to produce one pound
of beef can produce sixteen pounds of grain, ft The land required to
feed one meat-eater for a year is three and a quarter acres; for a
lacto-ovo-vegetarian, one-half acre; and one complete vegetarian,
one-sixth acre.^ In other words, one acre can feed twenty times as
* Fields, David, and Robin Hur "America's Appetite for Meat Is Ruining Our Water," Vegetarian
Times, January 1985.
t Spencer, Vivian, "Raw Materials in the United States Economy 190&-1977," Technical Paper
47, Dept. of Commerce, Dept. of Interior, Bureau of Mines, cited in J. Robbins.
t Robbins, John. Diet for a New America.
** Department of Agriculture, cited inJ. Robbins.
ft Robbins, John, Diet for a New America.
^ Lappe, Frances Moore, Diet for a Small Planet. Ballannne Books. © 1982, cited inJ. Robbins.
501
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
many people if they eat a vegetarian diet! Forty-thousand children
starve every day, yet we clearly have the ability to feed them if we just
manage our resources more effectively. What's more, if every American
were to reduce his or her meat intake by just 10 percent, the number of
people who could be fed using the resources that would be freed from
growing livestock would be 100 million!* This is enough food to feed
every single starving man, woman, and child on earth—and have a
surplus. Obviously, we'd still have to deal with the political challenge of
distribution, but the food would certainly be available. Finally, one of the
most important natural resources that we are depleting as a result of our
meat habit is our topsoil. It takes nature 500 years to create one inch of
topsoil, and we're currently losing one inch every 16 years! Two hundred
years ago, our country had twenty-one inches of topsoil, and now we
have only six inches.! The amount of topsoil loss that is directly related
to livestock production is 85 percent.^ Without adequate topsoil, our
food chain collapses, and with it our ability to exist.
My initial exposure to most of the above statistics and the devastating
impact of meat eating on our environment was through my good friend
John Robbins (who is not related to me by birth, yet we truly are brothers
in our commitment to making a difference). John wrote a book. Diet/or
a New America, that was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize. I believe this
book has a place in the home of every American who wants to be aware
of the effects of their daily decisions and actions.
As John makes clear, the decision about what to put on your dinner
plate tonight is one that has profound processional effects. It sets in
motion a whole series of events and activities that are shaping the quality
of life on earth. You may ask, "How can one person hope to turn the
tide of such an enormous challenge?" John maintains that this battle
will be won not on Capitol Hill or in the boardrooms, but by individuals:
"the shopper in the supermarket stopping at the meat counter, picking
up that chuck steak marked $3.98 a pound, and realizing that they're
holding in their hand a very costly illusion. Behind that little price sticker
hides the forests that have been cut down, our children's food and water
supply, our children's topsoil, their future environment. And we have to
look at that steak and say, 'That costs too much.' Real power lies in the
* Lester Brown of the Worldwatch Institute, cited by Resenberger, UNICEF, "State of the
World's Children," adjusted using 1988 figures from the USDA, Agricultural Statistics 1989, cited
in J. Robbins.
t Hamack, Curtis, "In Plymouth County, Iowa, the Rich Topsoil's Going Fast, Alas," New York
Times, July 11, 1980, cited inJ. Robbins.
^ Hur, Robbin, Soil and Water Resources Conservation Act—Summary of Appraisal, USDA
Review Draft, 1980, cited in J. Robbins.
decisions you make in the supermarket and in restaurants and in
your kitchen."*
TAKE A STAND
By taking a stand, you not only stop participating in the misuse of our
resources, but you send a clear message to big businesses whose lifeblood
is tied to hamburger. In recent years, food-service companies like McDonald's and Carl's Jr. (Carl Karcher Enterprises) have begun to respond
to changes in consumer tastes by featuring salad bars and other alternative foods. McDonald's also recently stopped using polystyrene containers for its foods, and as a result estimates that it reduced its production
of hydrocarbons by 25 percent, making a measurable difference toward
an improved environment. As a consumer, use the skills that you've
learned in this book to bring about positive change: know what you
want, use your buying power as leverage to interrupt destructive
patterns, cause the companies to look for alternatives, and then
reinforce them for the desired behaviors by patronizing their products and services.
TEACH YOUR CHILDREN WELL—LEAD
BY EXAMPLE
As with any challenge, our environmental issues require education and
action to create change. Unfortunately, most people's idea of education is
tied to being in school, and they stop learning as soon as they
graduate—or even before they graduate! So many teachers who start out
with a vision of making a difference have fallen into the trap of learned
helplessness as a result of trymg to cope with numbing administrative
policies and not being prepared to deal with the personalities and real-life
issues confronting their students.
Yet throughout this book you've been exposed to many models of
excellence from whom we can learn. So how can you and I make a
difference? We can each take an active role in determining the quality of
our children's education. Could your children's teacher benefit by understanding the power of questions, global metaphors. Transformational
Vocabulary, values, rules, and conditioning? Share what you've learned,
and you can truly make a difference in this area.
* "The Fate of Our Planet," Bobbins Research Report.
503
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
Most important, we must teach our children the consequences of
their actions. We must make them aware of the impact they have on an
individual or local level and, by extension, their collective impact on the
global level. Don't let them ever fall into the trap of thinking that their
actions don't make a difference—if there's anything I've tried to convey
in this book, it's that even small decisions and small actions, consistently made, have far-reaching consequences.
One of the best ways to ensure that your child grows up with a
healthy sense of self-esteem is to show them that their decisions and
actions, consistently made, make a major difference. How can you do
that? Demonstrate what's possible by being an example. Demonstrate
to your kids the effect of asking empowering questions, living according
to values and rules you've consciously chosen, and using all the other
strategies you've learned thus far.
There are so many ways that you and I could contribute. We don't
need to wait until we have a grandiose master plan to make a difference.
We can have impact in a moment, in doing the smallest things, making
what often seem like insignificant decisions. It's true that most of our
heroes are hidden behind what seem like small acts done consistently.
Look around you. There are heroes everywhere, but we don't acknowledge them with the accolades they deserve for doing their jobs every day.
The men and women who work day in and day out as police officers are
clearly heroes. They protect us, they create for us a sense of security, yet
many of us see them as our enemy. Firemen are heroes, yet we generally
don't see them in that light unless we find ourselves in an emergency
situation. The same principle holds true for ambulance drivers, 911
emergency dispatchers, crisis-intervention counselors, and a whole host
of other unsung heroes.
just being prepared can make all the difference. For example, how
would you feel if someone had a heart attack in your presence, but you
were CPR-certified and knew what to do? What if your concerted efforts to keep their blood circulating, despite the apparent absence of
any signs of life, actually resulted in saving a life? I can promise you
one thing: the feeling of contribution you would get from that experience would give you a greater sense of fulfillment and joy than anything you've ever felt in your life—greater than any acknowledgment
anyone could possibly give you, greater than any amount of money you
could possibly earn, greater than any achievement you could possibly
have.
These are just some of the most dramatic examples. Are there other
ways in which you could contribute? You bet! You can be a hero by
simply being a people-builder, that is, by noticing people around you and
giving them support, encouragement, or a reminder of who they really
are. What if you were walking through a grocery store, and instead of
meandering aimlessly from the artichokes to the zucchinis, you actually
noticed and acknowledged each person you passed with a cheerful grin?
What if you gave a sincere compliment to a stranger? Could you, in that
moment, change their emotional state enough so that they could pass on
the smile or the compliment to the next person they saw as well? Perhaps
to their children? Could there be a processional effect set in motion by
that one action?
There are so many simple ways to make a difference. We don't have
to go out and save somebody's life. But maybe getting them to smile is
saving their life, or at least getting them to enjoy the life that they already
have. What are some other simple ways you could make a difference
today? On your way home from work, what if you decided to stop at a
senior citizens' home, walk in, and strike up a conversation? How would
it make them feel if you were to ask, "What are some of the most
important lessons you've learned in your life?" I'll bet they'd have plenty
to tell you! What if you stopped at your community hospital, visited a
patient and helped brighten their afternoon? Even if you did nothing but
listen to the person, you'd be a hero.
Why are so many people afraid to take such small steps to help
others? One of the most common reasons is that they are just embarrassed to be doing something they're uncertain about. They're afraid of
being rejected or appearing foolish. But you know what? If you want to
play the game and win, you've got to play "full out." You've got to be
willing to feel stupid, and you've got to be willing to try things that
might not work—and if they don't work, be willing to change your
approach. Otherwise, how could you innovate, how could you grow,
how could you discover who you really are?
"You can't live a perfect day without doing something/or
someone who will never be able to repay you."
—JOHN WOODEN
If we want to change the quality of life in our country, then we clearly
have to affect the value systems of a mass number of people. Our future is in the hands of our youth. Their values will one day be society's. As I write these words. President Bush has recently signed a
document that offers a unique opportunity for us if we maximize its
use. It's called the National and Community Service Act of 1990 and
is intended to provide program funds, training, and technical assistance
to enable communities to develop and expand service opportunities.
While the bill encourages all citizens to give of their time, talents, and
505
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
energy, it is aimed specifically at involving young people in a variety of
worthwhile projects.*
Consider the sense of contribution these young people will experience by helping the aged, physically disadvantaged, cancer patients, functionally illiterate, and others. Through the daily experience of
contributing, their identities and destinies will be profoundly affected.
Once touched by the gratitude of a fellow human being, a life transforms forever. Can you imagine the impact if the majority of our young
people share this experience?
Indeed, the most powerful processional effect you will ever set in
motion will be your burgeoning sense of contribution. We all have a need
to go beyond our base drives to avoid pain and gain pleasure. I believe
that in the deepest part of ourselves, we all want to do what we believe
is right, to go beyond ourselves, to commit our energy, time, emotion,
and capital to a larger cause. We must meet our moral and spiritual needs
even if it brings us pain in the short term. We respond not just to our
psychological needs, but to our moral imperative to do more and be
more than anyone could expect. Nothing gives us a greater sense of
personal satisfaction than contribution. Giving unselfishly is the foundation of fulfillment.
The power of such programs is that by giving to others on an ongoing
basis, we begin to reorient our values to the importance of contribution.
As a country, if we embrace this one value, it could change the face of the
nation and expand our influence in the world abroad. Don't limit yourself to the structure of government-backed programs, however. There
are so many organizations that have a crying need for manpower and
expertise, as well as financial and physical resources. Imagine the impact
if, regardless of reward or lack thereof, Americans as a whole make
contribution a must. Do you realize that if everyone in the country
(except the very young and elderly) were to contribute only three
hours a week, our nation would reap the rewards of over 320 million
hours of much-needed manpower dedicated to those causes that
need it most? If we all were to contribute five hours, the Hgure would
jump to half a billion hours with a monetary value in the trillions! Do
you think we could handle a few social challenges with this kind of
commitment?
Contributing your time to any one of the following will definitely
alter your perceptions of who you are and start you on the path of
becoming a hero.
* For more information on National and Community Service, please contact your congressperson or The Commission on National and Community Service, The National Press Building, 529
14th Street NW, 4th Floor, Washington, DC 20004, tel. 202-724-0600.
Here are some of the ways you can help. A small amount of time can
make a big difference. Consider the possibility of committing a few
hours a week or a few hours a month in one of the following areas
within your community:
Programs for the mentally and physically disadvantaged
Remedial tutoring in basic skills
Day care
Voter registration
Volunteer citizen patrols (Neighborhood Watch)
Library work—reshelving, cataloguing
Book distribution to bedridden
Energy conservation
Park maintenance

^

Community clean-up drives
Walk-a-thons
Drug education
Hotline counseling
Big Brother/Big Sister programs
International family adoption
Outreach programs
Emergency aid
Painting and building beautification
Orphanage programs
Arts and cultural museums
Hosting exchange students
Recycling programs
507
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
A GIFT OF POSSIBILITY:
AN INVITATION TO CONTRIBUTE
How does one embrace the homeless, heal criminals, rejuvenate the aged,
and mobilize the young? One exciting opportunity for you to contribute
is to work in partnership with me through The Anthony Robbins Foundation. We are a nonprofit organization formed to create a coalition of
caring professionals who have committed to consistently reach and assist
people who are often forgotten by society. We are aggressively working
to make a difference in the quality of life for children, the homeless, the
prison population, and the elderly. The Foundation is dedicated to providing the finest resources for inspiration, education, training, and development for these important members of our society. I founded it as
the result of my own life experience.
Years ago, I decided that contribution is not an obligation; it's an
opportunity to give something back. When I was eleven years old, my
family did not have enough money one year to afford a traditional
Thanksgiving dinner, and a charitable organization delivered food to our
door. Since then, helping the hungry and homeless has become one of
the missions to which I've dedicated my life, and, every Thanksgiving
since I was eighteen, I've made and delivered food baskets to needy
families. It was also at the age of eighteen that I first joined the Chino
prison support system. As a result of my community service, I formed an
identity as a philanthropist, a person who would truly make a difference,
someone who was committed. It increased my pride, my integrity, and
my capacity to give more to other people as well. And it allowed me to
inspire others to do the same.
Because of the massive exposure that my books, tapes, and television
shows have produced, I daily receive letters from people from all over the
world calling out for help. Some of the most profound and moving
transformations I hear about have been made by prisoners and those who
are no longer homeless. As a result, the Foundation has made available a complimentary copy of my thirty-day audio library, Personal
Power, as well as a copy of my first book. Unlimited Power, to every
prison system in the United States. As of this writing, we're in the
process of contacting each homeless shelter in the country to make them
the same offer. I've dedicated 10 percent of the royalties from this book
to the Foundation in order to fund these tape distributions. In addition,
Anthony Robbins & Associates,™ the franchisees who represent me with
my video-based seminars across the United States, is committed to conducting up to two programs a year in its respective communities at no
charge. These programs are held in prisons, homeless shelters, higb—i
schools, and senior citizen centers.
If you'd like to join forces with us, please contact the Foundation, ancri
consider enrolling in our Commit-2 program. It's a simple and balancecrd
way to cause yourself to grow personally and to contribute in a way thaL- t
truly makes a difference. Through Commit-2 you can give others the giEEt
of possibility through a monthly commitment to briefly visit an assigne«c=d
prisoner, elderly person, homeless adult or child, and be a true friendB.
You can also commit to help support one of our annual programs. W . e
sponsor a Youth Leadership Program, the Thanksgiving Basket Brrgade, prison seminars, and a project for the elderly, Project Wisdocsan
(more information follows this chapter).
Certainly you're not limited to working with our Foundation to mak=:e
a difference. There are organizations in your community right now ths^at
need your help. In fact, I've designed my Foundation to empower locaal
organizations already in place to succeed. Our Foundation members aacre
trained in how to make a measurable difference for the people they coacrdi
monthly. While a different coaching style is necessary for different chau^llenges, there are some universal principles. We all need to raise our staasmdards, change our beliefs, and develop new strategies for personal success-s.
In helping people, we need to provide profound knowledge—simple, bas—ic
distinctions that can immediately increase the quality of their lives. Ve:'-a-y
often they need to break through learned helplessness and develop ne==w
identities. These are skills and strategies, obviously, that form the backbone of my technology, and therefore we want all those who are involv.«Ked
in this program to have mastery of these skills as well. If you're interest-t^ed
in finding out more, please contact us at 1-800-964-2200, ext. TR.
"Only those who have learned the power of sincere
and selfless contribution experience life's deepest joy:
true/ulfillment."
—ANTHONY ROBBINS
If a simple Albanian nun, with no resources except her faith and co» —mmitment, can positively affect the lives of so many, then certainly you au.nd
I can deal with whatever challenges we have before us. If Ed Roberts a^r-an
emerge from his iron lung each morning to figure out how to change an
entire nation's attitudes toward the physically disadvantaged—awid
succeed—then maybe you and I can be heroes, too. If one person xc=an
single-handedly mobilize a nation through a videotape and an $£;-BOO
investment to stop the murdering of dolphins, then maybe you and I —can
also set powerful effects in motion. Often we don't know where the cbnuain
509
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
of events will lead us. Trust your intuition and give of your heart; you'll
be surprised at the miracles that will occur.
If you'll commit to giving an hour or two once a month, it will enhance
your identity and you'll become certain that you are "the kind of person"
who truly cares, who takes deliberate action to make a difference. You'll
discover that you have no problems in your business, because you've seen
what real problems are. The upsets you thought you had because your
stock went down today tend to disappear when you carry a man with no
legs to his bed, or when you cradle an AIDS baby in your arms.
"Verily, great grace may go with a little gift; and
precious are all things that come /rom Jriends."
/

—THEOCRITUS

Once you've mastered the elements of this book, your ability to deal with
your own challenges becomes a minor focus. What used to be difficult
becomes easy. At this point, you'll find yourself redirecting your energies
from concentrating primarily on yourself to improving what's happening
in your family, your community, and possibly the world around you. The
only way to do so with a lasting sense of fulfillment is through unselfish
contribution. So don't look for heroes; be one! You don't have to be
Mother Teresa (although you could, if you desired!).
However, make balance your watchword. Strive tor balance rather
than perfection. Most people live in a black-and-white world where they
think that they're either a volunteer with no life of their own, or just a
materialistic, achievement-oriented person who doesn't care to make a
difference. Don't fall into this trap. Life is a balance between giving and
receiving, between taking care of yourself and taking care of others. Yes,
give some of your time, capital and energy to those who truly need
it—but also be willing to give to yourself. And do so with joy, not with
guilt. You don't have to take the weight of the world on your shoulders. More people would contribute if they realized that they didn't
have to give anything up to do so. So do a little, and know that it can
mean a lot. If everyone did this, fewer people would have to do so much,
and more people would be helped!
The next time you see someone who's in trouble, instead of feeling
guilty because you have so many blessings and they don't, feel a sense
of excitement that you might be able to do just some little thing that
could make them think about themselves in a new way or simply feel appreciated or loved. You don't
have to commit your whole life to this. Just be sensitive; learn to ask people new questions that will
empower them; touch them in a new way. Capture these moments of opportunity, and contribution
will be a pleasure rather than a burden.
I often meet people who live in pain because they constantly focus on
the injustices of life. After all, how could a child be bom blind, without the
chance to ever experience the wonder of a rainbow? How can a man who
has never hurt anyone his entire life become a victim of a drive-by shooting? The meaning and the purpose behind some events are unknow-
able. This is the ultimate test of our faith. We must trust that everyone
in life is here to leam different lessons at different times, that good and bad
experiences are only the perceptions of man. After all, some of your worst
experiences have truly been your best. They've sculpted you, trained you,
developed within you a sensitivity and set you in a direction that reaches
out to impact your ultimate destiny. Remember the adage, "When the student is ready, the teacher will appear." By the way, just when you think
that you're the teacher, take another look—you're probably there to leam
something from this person you're so busy teaching!
"Somebody should tell us, right at the start of our
lives, that we are dying. Then we might live life to
the limit, every minute of every day. Do it! I say.
Whatever you want to do, do it now! There are only
so many tomorrows."
—MICHAEL LANDON
511
The Ultimate Challenge: What One Person Can Do
What's the message? Live life fully while you're here. Experience everything. Take care of yourself and your friends. Have fun, be crazy, be
weird. Go out and screw up! You're going to anyway, so you might as
well enjoy the process! Take the opportunity to leam from your mistakes:
find the cause of your problem and eliminate it. Don't try to be perfect;
just be an excellent example of being human. Constantly find ways to
improve yourself. Practice the discipline of CANI!; be a lifelong learner.
Take the time now to set up your Master System so that the game of life
is winnable. Let your humanity—your caring for yourself and others—be
the guiding principle of your life, but don't treat life so seriously that you
lose the power of spontaneity, the pleasure that comes from being silly
and being a kid.
Eighty-six-year-old Nadine Stair said it best:
"If I had my life to live over asain, I'd dare to make more mistakes next
time. I'd relax. I'd limber up. I'd be sillier than I've been this trip. I
would take fewer thinss seriously. I would take more chances, I would
take more trips, I would climb more mountains and swim more rivers.
I would eat more ice cream and less beans. I would, perhaps, have
more actual troubles but fewer imasinary ones. You see, I'm one of
those people who was sensible and sane, hour after hour, day after
day.
Oh, I've had my moments. If I had it to do over again, I'd have more
of them. In fact, I'd try to have nothins else—just moments, one after
another, instead of living so many years ahead of each day. I've been
one of those persons who never goes anywhere without a thermometer, a hot-water bottle, a raincoat, and a parachute. If I could do it
again, I would travel lighter than I have.
If I had my life to live over, 1 would start barefoot earlier in the
spring and stay that way later in the fall. I would go to more dances,
I would ride more merry-go-rounds, I would pick more daisies."
—NADINE STAIR
How do you want to be remembered? As a giant among men? Start
acting that way right now! Why wait to be memorable? Live each day as
if it were one of the most important days of your life, and you'll experience joy at a whole new level. Some people try to conserve their energy
so that they'll last longer. I don't know about you, but I believe that
what's most important is not how long we live, but how we live. I'd rather
wear out than rust out! Let's have the end find us climbing a new
mountain.
I think one of the greatest gifts our Creator ha-s given us is the gift of
anticipation and suspense. How boring life would be if we knew how it
would all turn out in advance! The truth is that in life, we never know
what's going to happen next! In the next few morments, something could
happen that could change the entire direction anc3 quality of your life in
an instant. We must learn to love change, for it is the only thing that is
certain.
What can change your life? Many things: a moment of deep thought
and a few decisions as you complete this book cox-ild change everything.
So could a conversation with a friend, a tape, a seminar, a movie, or a big,
fat, juicy "problem" that causes you to expand and become more. This is
the awakening you seek. So live in an attitude erf positive expectancy,
knowing that everything that happens in your life benefits you in some
way. Know that you are guided along a path of never-ending growth
and learning, and with it, the path of everlastLaig love.
Finally, as I leave you now, I just want to tell you how much I respect
and appreciate you as a person. We've never met, Txit it sure feels like it,
doesn't it? While we may not have met face to* face, we've certainly
touched hearts. You've offered me a great gift in allowing me to share
parts of my life and my skills with you, and my sinLcere hope is that some
of what we've shared here has moved you in a special way. If you'll now
use some of these strategies to increase the qualit^y of your life, then I'll
feel very lucky indeed.
I hope you'll stay in touch with me. I hope you'll write to me or that
we'll have the privilege of meeting personally in .a seminar, at a Foundation function, or by a "chance" crossing of our p»aths. Please be sure to
introduce yourself. I look forward to meeting you and hearing the story
of your life's success.
Til then, remember to expect miracles . . . because you are one. Be a
bearer of the light and,a force for good. I now pass the torch on to you.
Share your gifts; share your passion. And may God bless you.
"Someday, after we have mastered the winds, the
waves, the tide and gravity, we shall 1-iamess for God
the energies of love. Then, for the sec«ond time in the
history of the world, man will have (S. iscovered fire."
—TEILHARD DE CHARDIN

1
The Power of Positive Thinking
by Norman Vincent Peale


The Quality Book Club. First edition. 1956
This ebook version Copyright © 2006
www.Self-Improvement-eBooks.com
All Rights Reserved

2
Introduction
What This Book Can Do for You
THIS BOOK IS WRITTEN to suggest techniques and to
give examples which demonstrate that you do not need to be
defeated by anything, that you can have peace of mind,
improved health, and a never ceasing flow of energy. In
short, that your life can be full of joy and satisfaction. Of this
I have no doubt at all for I have watched countless persons
learn and apply a system of simple procedures that has
brought about the foregoing benefits in their lives. These
assertions, which may appear extravagant, are based on
bonafide demonstrations in actual human experience.
Altogether too many people are defeated by the everyday
problems of life. They go struggling, perhaps even whining,
through their days with a sense of dull resentment at what
they consider the "bad breaks" life has given them. In a sense
there may be such a thing as "the breaks" in this life, but
there is also a spirit and method by which we can control and
even determine those breaks. It is a pity that people should
let themselves be defeated by the problems, cares, and
difficulties of human existence, and it is also quite
unnecessary.
In saying this I certainly do not ignore or minimize the
hardships and tragedies of the world, but neither do I allow
them to dominate. You can permit obstacles to control your
mind to the point where they are uppermost and thus become
the dominating factors in your thought pattern. By learning
how to cast them from the mind, by refusing to become
mentally subservient to them, and by channeling spiritual
power through your thoughts you can rise above obstacles
which ordinarily might defeat you. By methods I shall
outline, obstacles are simply not permitted to destroy your
happiness and well being. You need be defeated only if you
3
are willing to be. This book teaches you how to "will" not to
be.
The purpose of this book is a very direct and simple one. It
makes no pretense to literary excellence nor does it seek to
demonstrate any unusual scholarship on my part. This is
simply a practical, direct action, personal improvement
manual. It is written with the sole objective of helping the
reader achieve a happy, satisfying, and worthwhile life. I
thoroughly and enthusiastically believe in certain
demonstrated and effective principles which, when practiced,
produce a victorious life. My aim is to set them forth in this
volume in a logical, simple, and understandable manner so
that the reader feeling a sense of need, may learn a practical
method by which he can build for himself, with God's help,
the kind of life he deeply desires.
If you read this book thoughtfully, carefully absorbing its
teachings, and if you will sincerely and persistently practice
the principles and formulas set forth herein, you can
experience an amazing improvement within yourself. By
using the techniques outlined here you can modify or change
the circumstances in which you now live, assuming control
over them rather than continuing to be directed by them.
Your relations with other people will improve. You will
become a more popular, esteemed, and well-liked individual.
By mastering these principles, you will enjoy a delightful
new sense of well being. You may attain a degree of health
not hitherto known by you and experience a new and keen
pleasure in living. You will become a person of greater
usefulness and will wield an expanded influence.
How can I be so certain that the practice of these principles
will produce such results? The answer is simply that for
many years in the Marble Collegiate Church of New York
City we have taught a system of creative living based on
spiritual techniques, carefully noting its operation in the lives
4

of hundreds of people. It is no speculative series of
extravagant assertions that I make, for these principles have
worked so efficiently over so long a period of time that they
are now firmly established as documented and demonstrable
truth. The system outlined is a perfected and amazing
method of successful living.
In my writings, including several books, in my regular
weekly newspaper column in nearly one hundred dailies, in
my national radio program over seventeen years, in our
magazine, Guideposts, and in lectures in scores of cities, I
have taught these same scientific yet simple principles of
achievement, health, and happiness. Hundreds have read,
listened, and practiced, and the results are invariably the
same: new life, new power, increased efficiency, greater
happiness.
Because so many have requested that these principles be put
into book form, the better to be studied and practiced, I am
publishing this new volume under the title, The Power of
Positive Thinking. I need not point out that the powerful
principles contained herein are not my invention but are
given to us by the greatest Teacher who ever lived and who
still lives. This book teaches applied Christianity; a simple
yet scientific system of practical techniques of successful
living that works.
—NORMAN VINCENT PEALE

5
Chapter 1
Believe in Yourself
BELIEVE IN YOURSELF! Have faith in your abilities!
Without a humble but reasonable confidence in your own
powers you cannot be successful or happy. But with sound
self-confidence you can succeed. A sense of inferiority and
inadequacy interferes with the attainment of your hopes, but
self-confidence leads to self-realization and successful
achievement. Because of the importance of this mental
attitude, this book will help you believe in yourself and
release your inner powers.
It is appalling to realize the number of pathetic people who
are hampered and made miserable by the malady popularly
called the inferiority complex. But you need not suffer from
this trouble. When proper steps are taken, it can be
overcome. You can develop creative faith in yourself—faith
that is justified.
After speaking to a convention of businessmen in a city
auditorium, I was on the stage greeting people when a man
approached me and with a peculiar intensity of manner
asked, "May I talk with you about a matter of desperate
importance to me?"
I asked him to remain until the others had gone, then we
went backstage and sat down.
"I'm in this town to handle the most important business deal
of my life," he explained. "If I succeed, it means everything
to me. If I fail, I'm done for."
I suggested that he relax a little, that nothing was quite that
final. If he succeeded, that was fine. If he didn't, well,
tomorrow was another day.
6
"I have a terrible disbelief in myself," he said dejectedly. "I
have no confidence. I just don't believe I can put it over. I am
very discouraged and depressed. In fact," he lamented, "I'm
just about sunk. Here I am, forty years old. Why is it that all
my life I have been tormented by inferiority feelings, by lack
of confidence, by self-doubt? I listened to your speech
tonight in which you talked about the power of positive
thinking, and I want to ask how I can get some faith in
myself."
"There are two steps to take," I replied. "First, it is important
to discover why you have these feelings of no power. That
requires analysis and will take time. We must approach the
maladies of our emotional life as a physician probes to find
something wrong physically. This cannot be done
immediately, certainly not in our brief interview tonight, and
it may require treatment to reach a permanent solution. But
to pull you through this immediate problem I shall give you a
formula which will work if you use it.
"As you walk down the street tonight I suggest that you
repeat certain words which I shall give you. Say them over
several times after you get into bed. When you awaken
tomorrow, repeat them three times before arising. On the
way to your important appointment say them three additional
times. Do this with an attitude of faith and you will receive
sufficient strength and ability to deal with this problem.
Later, if you wish, we can go into an analysis of your basic
problem, but whatever we come up with following that
study, the formula which I am now going to give you can be
a large factor in the eventual cure."
Following is the affirmation which I gave him—"I can do all
things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Philippians
4:13) He was unfamiliar with these words so I wrote them on
a card and had him read them over three times aloud.
"Now, follow that prescription, and I am sure things will
7
come out all right."
He pulled himself up, stood quietly for a moment, then said
with considerable feeling, "O.K., Doctor. O.K."
I watched him square his shoulders and walk out into the
night. He seemed a pathetic figure, and yet the way he
carried himself as he disappeared showed that faith was
already at work in his mind.
Subsequently he reported that this simple formula "did
wonders" for him and added, "It seems incredible that a few
words from the Bible could do so much for a person."
This man later had a study made of the reasons for his
inferiority attitudes. They were cleared away by scientific
counseling and by the application of religious faith. He was
taught how to have faith; was given certain specific
instructions to follow (these are given later in this chapter).
Gradually he attained a strong, steady, reasonable
confidence. He never ceases to express amazement at the
way in which things now flow toward rather than away from
him. His personality has taken on a positive, not negative,
character so that he no longer repels success, but, on the
contrary, draws it to him. He now has an authentic
confidence in his own powers.
There are various causes of inferiority feelings, and not a few
stem from childhood.
An executive consulted me about a young man whom he
wished to advance in his company. "But," he explained, "he
cannot be trusted with important secret information and I'm
sorry, for otherwise I would make him my administrative
assistant. He has all the other necessary qualifications, but he
talks too much, and without meaning to do so divulges
matters of a private and important nature."
8
Upon analysis I found that he "talked too much" simply
because of an inferiority feeling. To compensate for it he
succumbed to the temptation of parading his knowledge.
He associated with men who were rather well to do, all of
whom had attended college and belonged to a fraternity. But
this boy was reared in poverty, had not been a college man or
fraternity member. Thus he felt himself inferior to his
associates in education and social background. To build
himself up with his associates and to enhance his selfesteem, his subconscious mind, which always seeks to
provide a compensatory mechanism, supplied him with a
means for raising his ego.
He was on "the inside" in the industry, and accompanied his
superior to conferences where he met outstanding men and
listened to important private conversations. He reported just
enough of his "inside information" to cause his associates to
regard him with admiration and envy. This served to elevate
his self esteem and satisfy his desire for recognition.
When the employer became aware of the cause of this
personality trait, being a kindly and understanding man, he
pointed out to the young man the opportunities in business to
which his abilities could lead him. He also described how his
inferiority feelings caused his unreliability in confidential
matters. This self-knowledge, together with a sincere
practicing of the techniques of faith and prayer, made him a
valuable asset to his company. His real powers were
released.
I can perhaps illustrate the manner in which many youngsters
acquire an inferiority complex through the use of a personal
reference. As a small boy I was painfully thin. I had lots of
energy, was on a track team, was healthy and hard as nails,
but thin. And that bothered me because I didn't want to be
thin. I wanted to be fat. I was called "skinny," but I didn't
want to be called "skinny." I wanted to be called "fat." I
9
longed to be hard-boiled and tough and fat. I did everything
to get fat. I drank cod-liver oil, consumed vast numbers of
milk shakes, ate thousands of chocolate sundaes with
whipped cream and nuts, cakes and pies innumerable, but
they did not affect me in the slightest. I stayed thin and lay
awake nights thinking and agonizing about it. I kept on
trying to get heavy until I was about thirty, when all of a
sudden did I get heavy? I bulged at the seams. Then I
became self conscious because I was so fat, and finally had
to take off forty pounds with equal agony to get myself down
to respectable size.
In the second place (to conclude this personal analysis which
I give only because it may help others by showing how this
malady works), I was a minister's son and was constantly
reminded of that fact. Everybody else could do everything,
but if I did even the slightest little thing—"Ah, you are a
preacher's son." So I didn't want to be a preacher's son, for
preachers' sons are supposed to be nice and namby-pamby. I
wanted to be known as a hard-boiled fellow. Perhaps that is
why preachers' sons get their reputation for being a little
difficult, because they rebel against having to carry the
banner of the church all the time. I vowed there was one
thing I would never do, and that was to become a preacher.
Also, I came of a family practically every member of which
was a performer in public, a platform speaker, and that was
the last thing I wanted to be. They used to make me get up in
public to make speeches when it scared me to death, even
filled me with terror. That was years ago, but the twinge of it
comes to me every now and then when I walk onto a
platform. I had to use every known device to develop
confidence in what powers the good Lord gave me.
I found the solution of this problem in the simple techniques
of faith taught in the Bible. These principles are scientific
and sound and can heal any personality of the pain of
10
inferiority feelings. Their use can enable the sufferer to find
and release the powers which have been inhibited by a
feeling of inadequacy.
Such are some of the sources of the inferiority complex
which erect power barriers in our personalities. It is some
emotional violence done to us in childhood, or the
consequences of certain circumstances, or something we did
to ourselves. This malady arises out of the misty past in the
dim recesses of our personalities.
Perhaps you had an older brother who was a brilliant student.
He got A's in school; you made only C's, and you never
heard the last of it. So you believed that you could never
succeed in life as he could. He got A's and you got C's, so
you reasoned that you were consigned to getting C's all your
life.
Apparently you never realized that some of those who failed
to get high grades in school have been the greatest successes
outside of school. Just because somebody gets an A in
college doesn't make him the greatest man in the United
States, because maybe his A's will stop when he gets his
diploma, and the fellow who got C's in school will go on
later to get the real A's in life.
The greatest secret for eliminating the inferiority complex,
which is another term for deep and profound self doubt, is to
fill your mind to overflowing with faith. Develop a
tremendous faith in God and that will give you a humble yet
soundly realistic faith in yourself.
The acquiring of dynamic faith is accomplished by prayer,
lots of prayer, by reading and mentally absorbing the Bible
and by practicing its faith techniques. In another chapter I
deal with specific formulas of prayer, but I want to point out
here that the type of prayer that produces the quality of faith
required to eliminate inferiority is of a particular nature.
11
Surface skimming, formalistic and perfunctory prayer is not
sufficiently powerful.
A wonderful colored woman, a cook in the home of friends
of mine in Texas, was asked how she so completely mastered
her troubles. She answered that ordinary problems could be
met by ordinary prayers, but that "when a big trouble comes
along, you have to pray deep prayers."
One of my most inspiring friends was the late Harlowe B.
Andrews of Syracuse, New York, one of the best
businessmen and competent spiritual experts I ever knew. He
said the trouble with most prayers is that they aren't big
enough, "To get anywhere with faith," said he, "learn to pray
big prayers. God will rate you according to the size of your
prayers." Doubtless he was right, for the Scriptures say,
"According to your faith be it unto you." (Matthew 9:29) So
the bigger your problem, the bigger your prayer should be.
Roland Hayes, the singer, quoted his grandfather to me, a
man whose education was not equal to that of his grandson,
but whose native wisdom was obviously sound. He said,
"The trouble with lots of prayers is they ain't got no suction."
Drive your prayers deep into your doubts, fears, inferiorities.
Pray deep, big prayers that have plenty of suction and you
will come up with powerful and vital faith.
Go to a competent spiritual adviser and let him teach you
how to have faith. The ability to possess and utilize faith and
gain the release of powers it provides are skills and, like any
skills, must be studied and practiced to gain perfection.
At the conclusion of this chapter are listed ten suggestions
for overcoming your inferiority pattern and for developing
faith. Practice these rules diligently and they will aid you in
developing confidence in yourself by dissipating your
feelings of inferiority, however deeply imbedded.
12
At this point, however, I wish to indicate that to build up
feelings of self confidence the practice of suggesting
confidence concepts to your mind is very effective. If your
mind is obsessed by thoughts of insecurity and inadequacy it
is, of course, due to the fact that such ideas have dominated
your thinking over a long period of time. Another and more
positive pattern of ideas must be given the mind, and that is
accomplished by repetitive suggestion or confidence ideas.
In the busy activities of daily existence thought disciplining
is required if you are to re-educate the mind and make of it a
power-producing plant. It is possible, even in the midst of
your daily work, to drive confident thoughts into
consciousness. Let me tell you about one man who did so by
the use of a unique method.
One icy winter morning he called for me at a hotel in a
Midwestern city to take me about thirty-five miles to another
town to fill a lecture engagement. We got into his car and
started off at a rather high rate of speed on the slippery road.
He was going a little faster than I thought reasonable, and I
reminded him that we had plenty of time and suggested that
we take it easy.
"Don't let my driving worry you," he replied. "I used to be
filled with all kinds of insecurities myself, but I got over
them. I was afraid of everything. I feared an automobile trip
or an airplane flight; and if any of my family went away I
worried until they returned. I always went around with a
feeling that something was going to happen, and it made my
life miserable. I was saturated with inferiority and lacked
confidence. This state of mind reflected itself in my business
and I wasn't doing very well. But I hit upon a wonderful plan
which knocked all these insecurity feelings out of my mind,
and now I live with a feeling of confidence, not only in
myself but in life generally."
This was the "wonderful plan." He pointed to two clips
13
fastened on the instrument panel of the car just below the
windshield and, reaching into the glove compartment, took
out a pack of small cards. He selected one and slipped it
beneath the clip. It read, "If ye have faith...nothing shall be
impossible unto you." (Matthew 17:20) He removed that
one, shuffled expertly through the cards with one hand as he
drove, selected another, and placed it under the clip. This one
read, "If God be for us, who can be against us?" (Romans
8:31)
"I'm a traveling salesman," he explained, "and I drive around
all day calling on my customers. I have discovered that while
a man drives he thinks all kinds of thoughts. If his pattern of
thought is negative, he will think many negative thoughts
during the day and that, of course, is bad for him; but that is
the way I used to be. I used to drive around all day between
calls drinking fear and defeat thoughts, and incidentally that
is one reason my sales were down. But since I have been
using these cards as I drive and committing the words to
memory, I have learned to think differently. The old
insecurities that used to haunt me are just about all gone, and
instead of drinking fear thoughts of defeat and
ineffectiveness, 1 think thoughts of faith and courage. It is
really wonderful the way this method has changed me. It has
helped in my business, too, for how can one expect to make a
sale if he drives up to a customer's place of business thinking
he is not going to make a sale?"
This plan used by my friend is a very wise one. By filling his
mind with affirmations of the presence, support, and help of
God, he had actually changed his thought processes. He put
an end to the domination of his long held sense of insecurity.
His potential powers were set free.
We build up the feeling of insecurity or security by how we
think. If in our thoughts we constantly fix attention upon
sinister expectations of dire events that might happen, the
14
result will be constantly to feel insecure. And what is even
more serious is the tendency to create, by the power of
thought, the very condition we fear. This salesman actually
created positive results by vital thoughts of courage and
confidence through the process of placing the cards before
him in his car. His powers, curiously inhibited by a defeat
psychology, now flowed out of a personality in which
creative attitudes had been stimulated.
Lack of self-confidence apparently is one of the great
problems besetting people today. In a university a survey
was made of six hundred students in psychology courses.
The students were asked to state their most difficult personal
problem. Seventy-five percent listed lack of confidence. It
can safely be assumed that the same large proportion is true
of the population generally. Everywhere you encounter
people who are inwardly afraid, who shrink from life, who
suffer from a deep sense of inadequacy and insecurity, who
doubt their own powers. Deep within themselves they
mistrust their ability to meet responsibilities or to grasp
opportunities. Always they are beset by the vague and
sinister fear that something is not going to be quite right.
They do not believe that they have it in them to be what they
want to be, and so they try to make themselves content with
something less than that of which they are capable.
Thousands upon thousands go crawling through life on their
hands and knees, defeated and afraid. And in most cases such
frustration of power is unnecessary.
The blows of life, the accumulation of difficulties, the
multiplication of problems tend to sap energy and leave you
spent and discouraged. In such a condition the true status of
your power is often obscured, and a person yields to a
discouragement that is not justified by the facts. It is vitally
essential to re-appraise your personality assets. When done
in an attitude of reasonableness, this evaluation will convince
you that you are less defeated than you think you are.
15
For example, a man fifty-two years of age consulted me. He
was in great despondency. He revealed utter despair. He said
he "was all through." He informed me that everything he had
built up over his lifetime had been swept away.
"Everything?" I asked.
"Everything," he repeated. He was through, he reiterated. "I
have nothing left at all. Everything is gone. There is no hope,
and I am too old to start all over again. I have lost all faith."
Naturally I felt sympathetic toward him, but it was evident
that his chief trouble was the fact that dark shadows of
hopelessness had entered his mind and discolored his
outlook, distorting it. Behind this twisted thinking his true
powers had retreated, leaving him without force.
"So," I said, "suppose we take a piece of paper and write
down the values you have left."
"There's no use," he sighed. "I haven't a single thing left. I
thought I told you that."
I said, "Let's just see anyway." Then asked, "Is your wife still
with you?"
"Why, yes, of course, and she is wonderful. We have been
married for thirty years. She would never leave me no matter
how bad things are."
"All right, let us put that down—your wife is still with you
and she will never leave you no matter what happens. How
about your children? Got any children?"
"Yes," he replied, "I have three and they are certainly
wonderful. I have been touched by the way they have come
to me and said, 'Dad, we love you, and we'll stand by you.' "
"Well, then," I said, "that is number two—three children who
16
love you and who will stand by you. Got any friends?" I
asked.
"Yes," he said, "I really have some fine friends. I must admit
they have been pretty decent. They have come around and
said they would like to help me, but what can they do? They
can't do anything."
"That is number three—you have some friends who would
like to help you and who hold you in esteem. How about
your integrity? Have you done anything wrong?"
"My integrity is all right," he replied. "I have always tried to
do the right thing and my conscience is clear."
"All right," I said, "we will put that down as number four—
integrity. How about your health?"
"My health is all right," he answered. "I have had very few
sick days and I guess I am in pretty good shape physically."
"So let's put down as number five—good physical health.
How about the United States? Do you think it's still doing
business and is the land of opportunity?"
"Yes," he said. "It is the only country in the world I would
want to live in."
"That is number six—you live in the United States, land of
opportunity, and you are glad to be here." Then I asked,
"How about your religious faith? Do you believe in God and
that God will help you?"
"Yes," he said. "I do not think I could have gotten through
this at all if I hadn't had some help from God."
"Now," I said, "let's list the assets we have figured out:
"1. A wonderful wife—married for thirty years.
17
"2. Three devoted children who will stand by you.
"3. Friends who will help you and who hold you in esteem.
"4. Integrity—nothing to be ashamed of.
"5. Good physical health.
"6. Live in the United States, the greatest country in the
world.
"7. Have religious faith."
I shoved it across the table at him. "Take a look at that. I
guess you have quite a total of assets. I thought you told me
everything had been swept away."
He grinned ashamedly. "I guess I didn't think of those things.
I never thought of it that way. Perhaps things aren't so bad at
that," he said pensively. "Maybe I can start all over again if I
can just get some confidence, if I can get the feel of some
power within me."
Well, he got it, and he did start all over again. But he did so
only when he changed his viewpoint, his mental attitude.
Faith swept away his doubts, and more than enough power to
overcome all his difficulties emerged from within him.
This incident illustrates a profound truth which is expressed
in a very important statement made by the famous
psychiatrist, Dr. Karl Menninger. He said, "Attitudes are
more important than facts." That is worth repeating until its
truth grips you. Any fact facing us, however difficult, even
seemingly hopeless, is not so important as our attitude
toward that fact. How you think about a fact may defeat you
before you ever do anything about it. You may permit a fact
to overwhelm you mentally before you start to deal with it
actually. On the other hand, a confident and optimistic
thought pattern can modify or overcome the fact altogether.
I know a man who is a tremendous asset to his organization,
not because of any extraordinary ability, but because he
invariably demonstrates a triumphant thought pattern.
18
Perhaps his associates view a proposition pessimistically, so
he employs what he calls "the vacuum-cleaner method." That
is, by a series of questions he "sucks the dust" out of his
associates' minds; he draws out their negative attitudes. Then
quietly he suggests positive ideas concerning the proposition
until a new set of attitudes gives them a new concept of the
facts.
They often comment upon how different facts appear when
this man "goes to work on them." It's the confidence attitude
that makes the difference, nor does this rule out objectivity in
an appraisal of facts. The inferiority complex victim sees all
facts through discolored attitudes. The secret of correction is
simply to gain a normal view, and that is always slanted on
the positive side.
So if you feel that you are defeated and have lost confidence
in your ability to win, sit down, take a piece of paper and
make a list, not of the factors that are against you, but of
those that are for you. If you or I or anybody think constantly
of the forces that seem to be against us, we will build them
up into a power far beyond that which is justified. They will
assume a formidable strength which they do not actually
possess. But if, on the contrary, you mentally visualize and
affirm and reaffirm your assets and keep your thoughts on
them, emphasizing them to the fullest extent, you will rise
out of any difficulty regardless of what it may be. Your inner
powers will reassert themselves and, with the help of God,
lift you from defeat to victory.
One of the most powerful concepts, one which is a sure cure
for lack of confidence, is the thought that God is actually
with you and helping you. This is one of the simplest
teachings in religion, namely, that Almighty God will be
your companion, will stand by you, help you, and see you
through. No other idea is so powerful in developing self
confidence as this simple belief when practiced. To practice
19
it simply affirm "God is with me; God is helping me; God is
guiding me." Spend several minutes each day visualizing His
presence. Then practice believing that affirmation. Go about
your business on the assumption that what you have affirmed
and visualized is true. Affirm it, visualize it, believe it, and it
will actualize itself. The release of power which this
procedure stimulates will astonish you.
Feelings of confidence depend upon the type of thoughts that
habitually occupy your mind. Think defeat and you are
bound to feel defeated. But practice thinking confident
thoughts, make it a dominating habit, and you will develop
such a strong sense of capacity that regardless of what
difficulties arise you will be able to overcome them. Feelings
of confidence actually induce increased strength. Basil King
once said, "Be bold, and mighty forces will come to your
aid." Experience proves the truth of this. You will feel these
mighty forces aiding you as your increasing faith
reconditions your attitudes.
Emerson declared a tremendous truth, "They conquer who
believe they can." And he added, "Do the thing you fear and
the death of fear is certain." Practice confidence and faith
and your fears and insecurities will soon have no power over
you.
Once when Stonewall Jackson planned a daring attack, one
of his generals fearfully objected, saying, "I am afraid of
this" or "I fear that..." Putting his hand on his timorous
subordinate's shoulder, Jackson said, "General, never take
counsel of your fears."
The secret is to fill your mind with thoughts of faith,
confidence, and security. This will force out or expel all
thoughts of doubt, all lack of confidence. To one man who
for a long time had been haunted by insecurities and fears I
suggested that he read through the Bible underlining in red
pencil every statement it contains relative to courage and
20
confidence. He also committed them to memory, in effect
cramming his mind full of the healthiest, happiest, most
powerful thoughts in the world. These dynamic thoughts
changed him from cringing hopelessness to a man of
compelling force. The change in him in a few weeks was
remarkable. From almost complete defeat he became a
confident and inspiring personality. He now radiates courage
and magnetism. He regained confidence in himself and his
own powers by a simple process of thought conditioning.
To sum up—what can you do now to build up your selfconfidence? Following are ten simple, workable rules for
overcoming inadequacy attitudes and learning to practice
faith. Thousands have used these rules, reporting successful
results. Undertake this program and you, too, will build up
confidence in your powers. You, too, will have a new feeling
of power.
1. Formulate and stamp indelibly on your mind a mental
picture of yourself as succeeding. Hold this picture
tenaciously. Never permit it to fade. Your mind will seek to
develop this picture. Never think of yourself as failing; never
doubt the reality of the mental image. That is most
dangerous, for the mind always tries to complete what it
pictures. So always picture "success" no matter how badly
things seem to be going at the moment.
2. Whenever a negative thought concerning your personal
powers comes to mind, deliberately voice a positive thought
to cancel it out.
3. Do not built up obstacles in your imagination. Depreciate
every so-called obstacle. Minimize them. Difficulties must
be studied and efficiently dealt with to be eliminated, but
they must be seen for only what they are. They must not be
inflated by fear thoughts.
4. Do not be awestruck by other people and try to copy them.
21
Nobody can be you as efficiently as YOU can. Remember
also that most people, despite their confident appearance and
demeanor, are often as scared as you are and as doubtful of
themselves.
5. Ten times a day repeat these dynamic words, "If God be
for us, who can be against us?" (Romans 8:31) (Stop reading
and repeat them NOW slowly and confidently.)
6. Get a competent counselor to help you understand why
you do what you do. Learn the origin of your inferiority and
self-doubt feelings which often begin in childhood. Selfknowledge leads to a cure.
7. Ten times each day practice the following affirmation,
repeating it out loud if possible. "I can do all things through
Christ which strengtheneth me." (Philippians 4:13) Repeat
those words NOW. That magic statement is the most
powerful antidote on earth to inferiority thoughts.
8. Make a true estimate of your own ability, then raise it 10
percent. Do not become egotistical, but develop a wholesome
self-respect. Believe in your own God-released powers.
9. Put yourself in God's hands. To do that simply state, "I am
in God's hands." Then believe you are NOW receiving all the
power you need. "Feel" it flowing into you. Affirm that "the
kingdom of God is within you" (Luke 17:21) in the form of
adequate power to meet life's demands.
10. Remind yourself that God is with you and nothing can
defeat you. Believe that you now RECEIVE power from
him.

22
Chapter 2
A Peaceful Mind Generates Power
AT BREAKFAST IN A HOTEL dining room three of us tell
to discussing how well we had slept the night before, a truly
momentous topic. One man complained of a sleepless night.
He had tossed and turned and was about as exhausted as
when he retired. "Guess I'd better stop listening to the news
before going to bed," he observed. "I tuned in last night and
sure got an ear full of trouble."
That is quite a phrase, "an ear full of trouble." Little wonder
he had a disturbed night. "Maybe the coffee I drank before
retiring had something to do with it," he mused.
The other man spoke up, "As for me, I had a grand night. I
got my news from the evening paper and from an early
broadcast and had a chance to digest it before I went to sleep.
Of course," he continued, "I used my go-to-sleep plan which
never fails to work."
I prodded him for his plan, which he explained as follows:
"When I was a boy, my father, a farmer, had the habit of
gathering the family in the parlor at bedtime and he read to
us out of the Bible. I can hear him yet. In fact, every time I
hear those Bible verses I always seem to hear them in the
tone of my father's voice. After prayers I would go up to my
room and sleep like a top. But when I left home I got away
from the Bible reading and prayer habit.
"I must admit that for years practically the only time I ever
prayed was when I got into a jam. But some months ago my
wife and I, having a number of difficult problems, decided
we would try it again. We found it a very helpful practice, so
now every night before going to bed she and I together read
the Bible and have a little session of prayer. I don't know
23
what there is about it, but I have been sleeping better and
things have improved all down the line. In fact, I find it so
helpful that even out on the road, as I am now, I still read the
Bible and pray. Last night I got into bed and read the 23rd
Psalm. I read it out loud and it did me a lot of good."
He turned to the other man and said, "I didn't go to bed with
an ear full of trouble. I went to sleep with a mind full of
peace."
Well, there are two cryptic phrases for you—"an ear full of
trouble" and "a mind full of peace." Which do you choose?
The essence of the secret lies in a change of mental attitude.
One must learn to live on a different thought basis, and even
though thought change requires effort, it is much easier than
to continue living as you are. The life of strain is difficult.
The life of inner peace, being harmonious and without stress,
is the easiest type of existence. The chief struggle then in
gaining mental peace is the effort of revamping your
thinking to the relaxed attitude of acceptance of God's gift of
peace.
As an illustration of taking a relaxed attitude and therefore
receiving peace, I always think of an experience in a certain
city where I lectured one evening. Prior to going on the
platform I was sitting backstage going over my speech when
a man approached and wanted to discuss a personal problem.
I informed him that at the moment it was impossible to talk
as I was just about to be introduced, and asked him to wait.
While speaking I noticed him in the wings nervously pacing
up and down, but afterward he was nowhere about. However,
he had given me his card, which indicated that he was a man
of considerable influence in that city.
Back at my hotel, although it was late, I was still troubled by
this man so I telephoned him. He was surprised at my call
24
and explained that he did not wait because obviously I was
busy. "I just wanted you to pray with me," he said. "I thought
if you would pray with me, perhaps I could get some peace."
"There is nothing to prevent us from praying together on the
telephone right now," I said.
Somewhat in surprise, he replied, "I have never heard of
praying on the telephone."
"Why not?" I asked. "A telephone is simply a gadget of
communication. You are some blocks from me, but by
means of the telephone we are together. Besides," I
continued, "the Lord is with each of us. He is at both ends of
this line and in between. He is with you and He is with me."
"All right," he conceded. "I'd like to have you pray for me."
So I closed my eyes and prayed for the man over the
telephone, and I prayed just as though we were in the same
room. He could hear and the Lord could hear. When I
finished I suggested, "Won't you pray?" There was no
response. Then at the other end of the line I heard sobbing
and finally, "I can't talk," he said.
"Go on and cry for a minute or two and then pray," I
suggested. "Simply tell the Lord everything that is bothering
you. I assume this is a private line, but if not, and if anybody
is listening, it won't matter. As far as anyone is concerned,
we are just a couple of voices. Nobody would know it is you
and I."
Thus encouraged, he started to pray, hesitantly at first, and
then with great impetuosity he poured out his heart, and it
was filled with hate, frustration, failure—a mass of it. Finally
he prayed plaintively, "Dear Jesus, I have a lot of nerve to
ask you to do anything for me, because I never did anything
for you. I guess you know what a no-account I am, even
though I put on a big front. I am sick of all this, dear Jesus.
25
Please help me."
So I prayed again, and asked the Lord to answer his prayer,
then said, "Lord, at the other end of the telephone wire, place
your hand on my friend and give him peace. Help him now
to yield himself and accept your gift of peace." Then I
stopped, and there was a rather long pause, and I shall never
forget the tone in his voice as I heard him say, "I shall
always remember this experience, and I want you to know
that for the first time in months I feel clean inside and happy
and peaceful." This man employed a simple technique for
having a peaceful mind. He emptied his mind and he
received peace as a gift from God.
As a physician said, "Many of my patients have nothing
wrong with them except their thoughts. So I have a favorite
prescription that I write for some, but it is not a prescription
that you can fill at a drugstore. The prescription I write is a
verse from the Bible, 'Romans 12:2.' I do not write out that
verse for my patients. I make them look it up and it reads:
'...be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind...' To be
happier and healthier they need a renewing of their minds,
that is, a change in the pattern of their thoughts. When they
'take' this prescription, they actually achieve a mind full of
peace. That helps to produce health and well-being."
A primary method for gaining a mind full of peace is to
practice emptying the mind. This will be emphasized in
another chapter, but I mention it here to underscore the
importance of a frequent mental catharsis. I recommend a
mind-emptying at least twice a day, more often if necessary.
Definitely practice emptying your mind of fears, hates,
insecurities, regrets, and guilt feelings. The mere fact that
you consciously make this effort to empty your mind tends to
give relief. Haven't you experienced a sense of release when
you have been able to pour out to somebody whom you can
trust worrisome matters that lay heavy upon the heart? As a
26
pastor I have often observed how much it means to people to
have someone to whom they can truly and in confidence tell
everything troubling their minds.
I conducted a religious service on board the S.S. Lurline on a
recent voyage to Honolulu. In the course of my talk I
suggested that people who were carrying worries in their
minds might go to the stern of the vessel and imaginatively
take such anxious thought out of the mind, drop it overboard,
and watch it disappear in the wake of the ship. It seems an
almost childlike suggestion, but a man came to me later that
day and said, "I did as you suggested and am amazed at the
relief it has given me. During this voyage," he said, "every
evening at sunset I am going to drop all my worries
overboard until I develop the psychology of casting them
entirely out of my consciousness. Every day I shall watch
them disappear in the great ocean of time. Doesn't the Bible
say something about 'forgetting those things that are
behind'?"
The man to whom this suggestion appealed is not an
impractical sentimentalist. On the contrary, he is a person of
extraordinary mental stature, an outstanding leader in his
field.
Of course, emptying the mind is not enough. When the mind
is emptied, something is bound to enter. The mind cannot
long remain a vacuum. You cannot go around permanently
with an empty mind. I admit that some people seem to
accomplish that feat, but by and large it is necessary to refill
the emptied mind or the old, unhappy thoughts which you
have cast out will come sneaking in again.
To prevent that happening, immediately start filling your
mind with creative and healthy thoughts. Then when the old
fears, hates, and worries that have haunted you for so long
try to edge back in, they will in effect find a sign on the door
of your mind reading "occupied." They may struggle for
27
admission, for having lived in your mind for a long time,
they feel at home there. But the new and healthy thoughts
which you have taken in will now be stronger and better
fortified, and therefore able to repulse them. Presently the
old thoughts will give up altogether and leave you alone.
You will permanently enjoy a mind full of peace.
At intervals during the day practice thinking a carefully
selected series of peaceful thoughts. Let mental pictures of
the most peaceful scenes you have ever witnessed pass
across your mind, as, for example, some beautiful valley
filled with the hush of evening time, as the shadows lengthen
and the sun sinks to rest. Or recall the silvery light of the
moon falling upon rippling waters, or remember the sea
washing gently upon soft shores of sand. Such peaceful
thought images will work upon your mind as a healing
medicine. So now and then during every day allow motion
pictures of peace slowly to cross your mind.
Practice the technique of suggestive articulation, that is,
repeat audibly some peaceful words. Words have profound
suggestive power, and there is healing in the very saying of
them. Utter a series of panicky words and your mind will
immediately go into a mild state of nervousness. You will
perhaps feel a sinking in the pit of your stomach that will
affect your entire physical mechanism. If, on the contrary,
you speak peaceful, quieting words, your mind will react in a
peaceful manner. Use such a word as "tranquillity." Repeat
that word slowly several times. Tranquillity is one of the
most beautiful and melodic of all English words, and the
mere saying of it tends to induce a tranquil state.
Another healing word is "serenity." Picturize serenity as you
say it. Repeat it slowly and in the mood of which the word is
a symbol. Words such as these have a healing potency when
used in this manner.
It is also helpful to use lines from poetry or passages from
28
the Scriptures. A man of my acquaintance who achieved a
remarkable peace of mind has the habit of writing on cards
unusual quotations expressing peacefulness. He carries one
of the cards in his wallet at all times, referring to it
frequently until each quotation is committed to memory. He
says that each such idea dropped into the subconscious
"lubricates" his mind with peace. A peaceful concept is
indeed oil on troubled thoughts. One of the quotations which
he used is from a sixteenth-century mystic, "Let nothing
disturb you. Let nothing frighten you. Everything passes
away except God. God alone is sufficient."
The words of the Bible have a particularly strong therapeutic
value. Drop them into your mind, allowing them to
"dissolve" in consciousness, and they will spread a healing
balm over your entire mental structure. This is one of the
simplest processes to perform and also one of the most
effective in attaining peace of mind.
A salesman told me of an incident that took place in a
Midwestern hotel room. He was one of a group of
businessmen having a conference. One man was very much
on edge. He was snappy, argumentative, high-strung.
Everyone present knew him quite well and realized he was
under great nervous pressure. But finally his irritating
attitudes began to get on everybody's nerves. Presently this
nervous individual opened his traveling bag, took out a big
bottle of brackish-looking medicine, and poured himself a
large dose. Asked what this medicine was, he growled, "Oh,
it's something for nerves. I feel like I'm going to break in
pieces. The pressure I'm under makes me wonder if I am
going to crack up. I try not to show it, but I suppose even you
fellows have observed swallowed several bottles of it, but I
don't seem to get any better."
The other men laughed, then one said in a kindly manner,
"Bill, I don't know anything about that medicine you are
29
taking. Maybe it's all right. It probably is, but I can give you
some medicine for those nerves that will do you more good
than that. I know, because it cured me, and I was worse off
than you are."
"What is this medicine?" snapped the other.
"This book will do the job, and I really mean it. I suppose
you think it strange that I carry a Bible around in my bag, but
I don't care who knows it. I am not a bit ashamed of it. I have
been carrying this Bible in my bag for the past two years,
and I have marked places in it that help keep my mind at
peace. It works for me, and I think it can do something for
you too. Why not give it a trial?"
The others were listening with interest to this unusual
speech. The nervous man had sunk low in his chair. Seeing
that he was making an impression, the speaker continued, "I
had a peculiar experience in a hotel one night which got me
into the habit of reading the Bible. I was getting into a pretty
tense state. I was out on a business trip and late one
afternoon came up to my room terribly nervous. I tried to
write some letters, but couldn't get my mind on them. I paced
up and down the room, tried to read the paper, but that
annoyed me, so I decided to go down and get a drink—
anything to get away from myself.
"While standing by the dresser, my eye happened to fall
upon a Bible lying there. I had seen many such Bibles in
hotel rooms, but had never read any of them. However,
something impelled me, and I opened the book to one of the
Psalms and started to read it. I remember that I read that one
standing up, then sat down and read another. I was interested
but certainly surprised at myself—me reading the Bible! It
was a laugh, but I kept on reading.
"Soon I came to the 23rd Psalm. I had learned that one as a
boy in Sunday school and was surprised that I still knew
30
most of it by heart. I tried saying it over, especially that line
where it says, 'He leadeth me beside the still waters; he
restoreth my soul.' I liked that line. It sort of got me. I sat
there repeating it over and over—and the next thing I knew I
woke up.
"Apparently I had dropped off to sleep and slept soundly. I
slept only about fifteen minutes, but upon awakening was as
refreshed and rested as if I'd had a good night's sleep. I can
remember yet the wonderful feeling of complete
refreshment. Then I realized that I felt peaceful, and said to
myself, 'Isn't it strange? What is wrong with me that I have
missed something as wonderful as this?'
"So after that experience," he said, "I bought a Bible, a little
one I could put in my bag, and I've been carrying it ever
since. I honestly like to read it, and I am not nearly so
nervous as I used to be. So," he added, "try that, Bill, and see
if it doesn't work."
Bill did try it, and he kept on trying it. He reported that it was
a bit strange and difficult for him at first, and he read the
Bible on the sly when nobody was around. He didn't want to
be thought holy or pious. But now he says he brings it out on
trains and planes or "any old place" and reads it, and it "does
him a world of good."
"I no longer need to take nerve medicine," he declared.
This scheme must have worked in Bill's case, for he is easy
to get along with now. His emotions are under control. These
two men found that getting peace of mind isn't complicated.
You merely feed your mind with thoughts that cause it to be
peaceful. To have a mind full of peace merely fill it full of
peace. It's as simple as that.
There are other practical ways by which you can develop
serenity and quiet attitudes. One way is through your
31
conversation. Depending upon the words we use and the tone
in which we use them, we can talk ourselves into being
nervous, high-strung, and upset. We can talk ourselves into
either negative or positive results. By our speech we can also
achieve quiet reactions. Talk peaceful to be peaceful.
In a group when the conversation takes a trend that is
upsetting, try injecting peaceful ideas into the talk. Note how
it counteracts the nervous tensions. Conversation filled with
expressions of unhappy expectation, at breakfast, for
example, often sets the tone of the day. Little wonder things
turn out according to the unhappy specifications. Negative
conversation adversely affects circumstances. Certainly talk
of a tense and nervous nature enhances inner agitation.
On the contrary, start each day by affirming peaceful,
contented, and happy attitudes and your days will tend to be
pleasant and successful. Such attitudes are active and definite
factors in creating satisfactory conditions. Watch your
manner of speech then if you wish to develop a peaceful
state of mind.
It is important to eliminate from conversations all negative
ideas, for they tend to produce tension and annoyance
inwardly. For example, when you are with a group of people
at luncheon, do not comment that the "Communists will soon
take over the country." In the first place, Communists are not
going to take over the country, and by so asserting you create
a depressing reaction in the minds of others. It undoubtedly
affects digestion adversely. The depressing remark colors the
attitude of all present, and everyone goes away with a
perhaps slight but definite feeling of annoyance. They also
carry away with them a mild but definite feeling that
something is wrong with everything. There are times when
we must face these harsh questions and deal with them
objectively and vigorously, and no one has more contempt
for Communism than I have, but as a general thing to have
32
peace of mind, fill your personal and group conversations
with positive, happy, optimistic, satisfying expressions.
The words we speak have a direct and definite effect upon
our thoughts. Thoughts create words, for words are the
vehicles of ideas. But words also affect thoughts and help to
condition if not to create attitudes. In fact, what often passes
for thinking starts with talk. Therefore if the average
conversation is scrutinized and disciplined to be sure that it
contains peaceful expressions, the result will be peaceful
ideas and ultimately, therefore, a peaceful mind.
Another effective technique in developing a peaceful mind is
the daily practice of silence. Everyone should insist upon not
less than a quarter of an hour of absolute quiet every twentyfour hours. Go alone into the quietest place available to you
and sit or lie down for fifteen minutes and practice the art of
silence. Do not talk to anyone. Do not write. Do not read.
Think as little as possible. Throw your mind into neutral.
Conceive of your mind as quiescent, inactive. This will not
be easy at first because thoughts are stirring up your mind,
but practice will increase your efficiency. Conceive of your
mind as the surface of a body of water and see how nearly
quiet you can make it, so that there is not a ripple. When you
have attained a quiescent state, then begin to listen for the
deeper sounds of harmony and beauty and of God that are to
be found in the essence of silence.
Americans unfortunately are not skilled in this practice,
which is a pity, for as Thomas Carlyle said, "Silence is the
element in which great things fashion themselves." This
generation of Americans has missed something that our
forefathers knew and which helped to condition their
character—and that is the silence of the great forest or of the
far-reaching plains.
Perhaps our lack of inner peace is due to some extent to the
effect of noise upon the nervous system of modern people.
33
Scientific experiments show that noise in the place where we
work, live, or sleep reduces efficiency to a noticeable degree.
Contrary to popular belief, it is doubtful if we ever
completely adjust our physical, mental, or nervous
mechanisms to noise. No matter how familiar a repeated
sound becomes, it never passes unheard by the subconscious.
Automobile horns, the roar of airplanes, and other strident
noises actually result in physical activity during sleep.
Impulses transmitted to and through the nerves by these
sounds cause muscular movements which detract from real
rest. If the reaction is sufficiently severe, it partakes of the
nature of shock.
On the contrary, silence is a healing, soothing, healthy
practice. Starr Daily says, "No man or woman of my
acquaintance who knows how to practice silence and does it
has ever been sick to my knowledge. I have noticed that my
own afflictions come upon me when I do not balance
expression with relaxation." Starr Daily closely associates
silence with spiritual healing. The sense of rest that results
from a practice of complete silence is a therapy of utmost
value.
In the circumstances of modern life, with its acceleration of
pace, the practice of silence is admittedly not so simple as it
was in the days of our forefathers. A vast number of noiseproducing gadgets exist that they did not know, and our daily
program is more hectic. Space has been annihilated in the
modern world, and apparently we are also attempting to
annihilate the factor of time. It is only rarely possible for an
individual to walk in deep woods or sit by the sea or meditate
on a mountaintop or on the deck of a vessel in the midst of
the ocean. But when we do have such experiences, we can
print on the mind the picture of the silent place and the feel
of the moment and return to it in memory to live it over
again just as truly as when we were actually in that scene. In
fact, when you return to it in memory the mind tends to
34
remove any unpleasant factors present in the actual situation.
The memory visit is often an improvement over the actual
for the mind tends to reproduce only the beauty in the
remembered scene.
For example, as I write these words, I am on a balcony of
one of the most beautiful hotels in the world, the Royal
Hawaiian on the famed and romantic Waikiki Beach in
Honolulu, Hawaii. I am looking into a garden filled with
graceful palm trees, swaying in the balmy breeze. The air is
laden with the aroma of exotic flowers. Hibiscus, of which
on these islands there are two thousand varieties, fill the
garden. Outside my windows are papaya trees laden with
ripening fruit. The brilliant color of the royal poinciana, the
flame of the forest trees, adds to the glamor of the scene; and
the acacia trees are hung heavily with their exquisite white
flowers.
The incredible blue ocean surrounding these islands stretches
away to the horizon. The white waves are surging in, and the
Hawaiians and my fellow visitors are riding gracefully on
surfboards and outrigger canoes. Altogether it is a scene of
entrancing beauty. It has an indescribably healing effect
upon me as I sit here writing about the power generated in a
peaceful mind. The insistent responsibilities under which I
ordinarily live seem so far away. Though I am in Hawaii to
give a series of lectures and to write this book, nevertheless
the peace with which this place is filled envelops me. Yet I
realize that when I have returned to my home in New York,
five thousand miles away, I shall only then truly savor the
exquisite joy of the beauty which I now behold. It will
become enshrined in memory as a private retreat to which
my mind can go in the busy days that lie ahead. Often, when
far from this idyllic place, I shall return in memory to find
peace along the palm-lined, foam-washed beach at Waikiki.
Fill your mind with all peaceful experiences possible, then
35
make planned and deliberate excursions to them in memory.
You must learn that the easiest way to an easy mind is to
create an easy mind. This is done by practice, by the
application of some such simple principles as outlined here.
The mind quickly responds to teaching and discipline. You
can make the mind give you back anything you want, but
remember the mind can give back only what it was first
given. Saturate your thoughts with peaceful experiences,
peaceful words and ideas, and ultimately you will have a
storehouse of peace-producing experiences to which you
may turn for refreshment and renewal of your spirit. It will
be a vast source of power.
I spent a night with a friend who has a very lovely home. We
had breakfast in a unique and interesting dining room. The
four walls are painted in a beautiful mural picturing the
countryside in which my host was reared as a boy. It is a
panorama of rolling hills, gentle valleys, and singing
streams, the latter clean and sun speckled, and babbling over
rocks. Winding roads meander through pleasant meadows.
Little houses dot the landscape. In a central position is a
white church surmounted by a tall steeple.
As we breakfasted my host talked of this region of his youth,
pointing out various points of interest in the painting around
the wall. Then he said, "Often as I sit in this dining room I go
from point to point in my memory and relive other days. I
recall, for example, walking up that lane as a boy with bare
feet, and I can remember yet how the clean dust felt between
my toes. I remember fishing in that trout stream on many a
summer afternoon and coasting down those hills in the
wintertime.
"There is the church I attended as a boy." He grinned and
said, "I sat through many a long sermon in that church but
gratefully recall to mind the kindliness of the people and the
sincerity of their lives. I can sit here and look at that church
36
and think of the hymns I heard there with my mother and
father as we sat together in the pew. They are long buried in
that cemetery alongside the church, but in memory I go and
stand by their graves and hear them speak to me as in days
gone by. I get very tired and sometimes am nervous and
tense. It helps to sit here and go back to the days when I had
an untroubled mind, when life was new and fresh. It does
something for me. It gives me peace."
Perhaps we all cannot have such murals on the dining-room
walls, but you can put them around the wall of your mind:
pictures of the most beautiful experiences of your life. Spend
time among the thoughts which these pictures suggest. No
matter how busy you may be or what responsibilities you
carry, this simple, rather unique practice, having proved
successful in many instances, may have a beneficial effect
upon you. It is an easily practiced, easy way to a peaceful
mind.
There is a factor in the matter of inner peace which must be
stated because of its importance.
Frequently I find that people who are lacking in inner peace
are victims of a self-punishment mechanism. At some time in
their experience they have committed a sin and the sense of
guilt haunts them. They have sincerely sought Divine
forgiveness, and the good Lord will always forgive anyone
who asks Him and who means it. However, there is a curious
quirk within the human mind whereby sometimes an
individual will not forgive himself.
He feels that he deserves punishment and therefore is
constantly anticipating that punishment. As a result he lives
in a constant apprehension that something is going to
happen. In order to find peace under these circumstances he
must increase the intensity of his activity. He feels that hard
work will give him some release from his sense of guilt. A
37
physician told me that in his practice a number of cases of
nervous breakdown were traceable to a sense of guilt for
which the patient had unconsciously attempted to
compensate by hectic overwork. The patient attributed his
breakdown not to the sense of guilt, but to his overworked
condition. "But," said the physician, "these men need not
have broken down from overwork if first the sense of guilt
had been fully released." Peace of mind under such
circumstances is available by yielding the guilt as well as the
tension it produces to the healing therapy of Christ.
At a resort hotel where I had gone for a few days of quiet
writing I encountered a man from New York whom I knew
slightly. He was a high-pressured, hard-driving, and
exceedingly nervous business executive. He was sitting in
the sun in a deck chair. At his invitation I sat down and
chatted with him.
"I'm glad to see you relaxing in this beautiful spot," I
commented.
He replied nervously, "I haven't any business being here. I've
so much work to do at home. I'm under terrible pressure.
Things have got me down, I'm nervous and can't sleep. I'm
jumpy. My wife insisted that I come down here for a week.
The doctors say there's nothing wrong with me if I just get to
thinking right and relax. But how in the world do you do
that?" he challenged. Then he gave me a piteous look.
"Doctor," he said, "I would give anything if I could be
peaceful and quiet. It's what I want more than anything in
this world."
We talked a bit, and it came out in the conversation that he
was always worrying that something sinister was going to
happen. For years he had anticipated some dire event, living
in constant apprehension about "something happening" to his
wife or his children or his home.
38
It was not difficult to analyze his case. His insecurity arose
from a double source—from childhood insecurities and from
later guilty experiences. His mother had always felt that
"something was going to happen," and he had absorbed her
anxiety feelings. Later he committed some sins, and his
subconscious mind insisted upon self-punishment. He
became victim to the mechanism of self-punishment. As a
result of this unhappy combination I found him this day in a
highly inflamed state of nervous reaction.
Finishing our conversation, I stood beside his chair a
moment. There was no one near, so I rather hesitantly
suggested, "Would you by any chance like me to pray with
you?" He nodded, and I put my hand on his shoulder and
prayed, "Dear Jesus, as You healed people in the long ago
and gave them peace, heal this man now. Give him fully of
Thy forgiveness. Help him to forgive himself. Separate him
from all his sins and let him know that You do not hold them
against him. Set him free from them. Then let Thy peace
flow into his mind, and into his soul, and into his body."
He looked up at me with a strange look on his face and then
turned away, for there were tears in his eyes and he didn't
want me to see them. We were both a bit embarrassed, and I
left him. Months later I met him, and he said, "Something
happened to me down there that day when you prayed for
me. I felt a strange sense of quietness and peace, and," he
added, "healing."
He goes to church regularly now and he reads the Bible
every day of his life. He follows the laws of God and he has
lots of driving force. He is a healthy, happy man, for he has
peace in his heart and mind.

39
Chapter 3
How to Have Constant Energy
A MAJOR-LEAGUE baseball pitcher once pitched a game
when the temperature was over one hundred degrees. He lost
several pounds as a result of the afternoon's exertion. At one
stage of the game his energy sagged. His method for
restoring his ebbing strength was unique. He simply repeated
a passage from the Old Testament—"But they that wait upon
the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with
wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they
shall walk, and not faint." (Isaiah 40:31)
Frank Hiller, the pitcher who had this experience, told me
that reciting this verse on the pitcher's mound actually gave
him a renewal of strength so that he was able to complete the
game with energy to spare. He explained the technique by
saying, "I passed a powerful energy-producing thought
through my mind."
How we think we feel has a definite effect on how we
actually feel physically. If your mind tells you that you are
tired, the body mechanism, the nerves, and the muscles
accept the fact. If your mind is intensely interested, you can
keep on at an activity indefinitely. Religion functions
through our thoughts, in fact, it is a system of thought
discipline. By supplying attitudes of faith to the mind it can
increase energy. It helps you to accomplish prodigious
activity by suggesting that you have ample support and
resources of power.
A friend in Connecticut, an energetic man, full of vitality and
vigor, says that he goes to church regularly to "get his
batteries recharged." His concept is sound. God is the source
of all energy—energy in the universe, atomic energy,
electrical energy, and spiritual energy; indeed every form of
40
energy derives from the Creator. The Bible emphasizes this
point when it says, "He giveth power to the faint; and to
them that have no might he increaseth strength." (Isaiah
40:29)
In another statement the Bible describes the energizing and
reenergizing process: "...in Him we live (that is, have
vitality), and move (have dynamic energy), and have our
being (attain completeness)." (Acts 17:28)
Contact with God establishes within us a flow of the same
type of energy that re-creates the world and that renews
springtime every year. When in spiritual contact with God
through our thought processes, the Divine energy flows
through the personality, automatically renewing the original
creative act. When contact with the Divine energy is broken,
the personality gradually becomes depleted in body, mind,
and spirit. An electric clock connected with an outlet does
not run down and will continue indefinitely to keep accurate
time. Unplug it, and the clock stops. It has lost contact with
the power flowing through the universe. In general this
process is operative in human experience though in a less
mechanical manner.
A number of years ago I attended a lecture at which a
speaker asserted before a large audience that he had not been
tired in thirty years. He explained that thirty years before he
had passed through a spiritual experience in which by selfsurrender he had made contact with Divine power. From then
on he possessed sufficient energy for all of his activities, and
these were prodigious. He so obviously illustrated his
teachings that everyone in that vast audience was profoundly
impressed.
To me it was a revelation of the fact that in our
consciousness we can tap a reservoir of boundless power as a
result of which it is not necessary to suffer depletion of
energy. For years I have studied and experimented with the
41
ideas which this speaker outlined and which others have
expounded and demonstrated, and it is my conviction that the
principles of Christianity scientifically utilized can develop
an uninterrupted and continuous flow of energy into the
human mind and body.
These findings were corroborated by a prominent physician
with whom I was discussing a certain man whom we both
know. This man, whose responsibilities are very heavy,
works from morning until night without interruption, but
always seems able to assume new obligations. He has the
knack of handling his work easily and with efficiency.
I commented to the physician that I hoped this man was not
setting a dangerous pace that might possibly lead to a
breakdown. The physician shook his head. "No," he replied,
"as his physician I do not think there is any danger of a
crack-up, and the reason is that he is a thoroughly wellorganized individual with no energy leaks in his make-up.
He operates a well-regulated machine. He handles things
with easy power and carries burdens without strain. He never
wastes an ounce of energy, but every effort is applied with
maximum force."
"How do you account for this efficiency, this seemingly
boundless energy?" I asked.
The physician studied for a moment. "The answer is that he
is a normal individual, emotionally well integrated, and,
what is more important, he is a soundly religious person.
From his religion he has learned how to avoid drainage of
power. His religion is a workable and useful mechanism for
preventing energy leaks. It is not hard work that drains off
energy but emotional upheaval, and this man is entirely free
from that."
Increasingly people are realizing that the maintenance of a
sound spiritual life is important in enjoying energy and
42
personality force.
The body is designed to produce all needed energy over an
amazingly long period of time. If the individual takes
reasonable care of his body from the standpoint of proper
diet, exercise, sleep, no physical abuse, the body will
produce and maintain astonishing energy and sustain itself in
good health. If he gives similar attention to a well-balanced
emotional life, energy will be conserved. But if he allows
energy leaks caused by hereditary or self-imposed emotional
reaction of a debilitating nature, he will be lacking in vital
force. The natural state of the individual when body, mind,
and spirit work harmoniously is that of a continuous
replacement of necessary energy.
Mrs. Thomas A. Edison, with whom I often discussed the
habits and characteristics of her famous husband, the world's
greatest inventive wizard, told me that it was Mr. Edison's
custom to come into the house from his laboratory after
many hours of labor and lie down on his old couch. She said
he would fall asleep as naturally as a child, in perfect
relaxation, sinking into a deep and untroubled slumber. After
three or four, or sometimes five hours he would become
instantly wide awake, completely refreshed, and eager to
return to his work.
Mrs. Edison, in answer to my request that she analyze her
husband's ability to rest in a manner so natural and complete,
said, "He was nature's man," by which she meant that he was
completely in harmony with nature and with God. In him
there were no obsessions, no disorganizations, no conflicts,
no mental quirks, no emotional instability. He worked until
he needed to sleep, then he slept soundly and arose and
returned to his work. He lived for many years, and was in
many respects the most creative mind ever to appear on the
American continent. He drew his energy from emotional
self-mastery, the ability to relax completely. His amazingly
43
harmonious relationship with the universe caused nature to
reveal to him its inscrutable secrets.
Every great personality I have ever known, and I have
known many, who has demonstrated the capacity for
prodigious work has been a person in tune with the Infinite.
Every such person seems in harmony with nature and in
contact with the Divine energy. They have not necessarily
been pious people, but invariably they have been
extraordinarily well organized from an emotional and
psychological point of view. It is fear, resentment, the
projection of parental faults upon people when they are
children, inner conflicts and obsessions that throw off
balance the finely equated nature, thus causing undue
expenditure of natural force.
The longer I live the more I am convinced that neither age
nor circumstance needs to deprive us of energy and vitality.
We are at last awakening to the close relationship between
religion and health. We are beginning to comprehend a basic
truth hitherto neglected, that our physical condition is
determined very largely by our emotional condition, and our
emotional life is profoundly regulated by our thought life.
All through its pages, the Bible talks about vitality and force
and life. The supreme over-all word of the Bible is life, and
life means vitality—to be filled with energy. Jesus stated the
key expression, "...I am come that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10) This
does not rule out pain or suffering or difficulty, but the clear
implication is that if a person practices the creative and recreative principles of Christianity he can live with power and
energy.
The practice ot the above-mentioned principles will serve to
bring a person into the proper tempo of living. Our energies
are destroyed because of the high tempo, the abnormal pace
at which we go. The conservation of energy depends upon
44
getting your personality speed synchronized with the rate of
God's movement. God is in you. It you are going at one rate
and God at another, you are tearing yourself apart. "Though
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding
small." The mills of most of us grind very rapidly, and so
they grind poorly. When we become attuned to God's rhythm
we develop a normal tempo within ourselves and energy
flows freely.
The hectic habits of this age have many disastrous effects. A
friend of mine commented upon an observation made by her
aged father. He said that in early days when a young man
came courting in the evening he sat with his intended in the
parlor. Time in those days was measured by the deliberate,
ponderous strokes of the grandfather clock, which has a very
long pendulum. It seemed to say, "There—is—plenty—of—
time. There—is—plenty—of—time. There—is—plenty—
of—time." But modern clocks, having a shorter pendulum
with a swifter stroke, seem to say, "Time to get busy! Time
to get busy! Time to get busy! Time to get busy!"
Everything is speeded up, and for that reason many people
are tired. The solution is to get into the time synchronization
of Almighty God. One way to do this is by going out some
warm day and lying down on the earth. Get your ear close
down to the ground and listen. You will hear all manner of
sounds. You will hear the sound of the wind in the trees and
the murmur of insects, and you will discover presently that
there is in all these sounds a well-regulated tempo. You
cannot get that tempo by listening to traffic in the city streets,
for it is lost in the confusion of sound. You can get it in
church where you hear the word of God and the great hymns.
Truth vibrates to God's tempo in a church. But you can also
find it in a factory if you have a mind to.
A friend of mine, an industrialist in a large plant in Ohio,
told me that the best workmen in his plant are those who get
45
into harmony with the rhythm of the machine on which they
are working. He declares that if a worker will work in
harmony with the rhythm of his machine he will not be tired
at the end of the day. He points out that the machine is an
assembling of parts according to the law of God. When you
love a machine and get to know it, you will be aware that it
has a rhythm. It is one with the rhythm of the body, of the
nerves, of the soul. It is in God's rhythm, and you can work
with that machine and not get tired if you are in harmony
with it. There is a rhythm of the stove, a rhythm of the
typewriter, a rhythm of the office, a rhythm of an
automobile, a rhythm of your job. So to avoid tiredness and
to have energy, feel your way into the essential rhythm of
Almighty God and all His works.
To accomplish this, relax physically. Then conceive of your
mind as likewise relaxing. Follow this mentally by
visualizing the soul as becoming quiescent, then pray as
follows: "Dear God, You are the source of all energy. You
are the source of the energy in the sun, in the atom, in all
flesh, in the bloodstream, in the mind. I hereby draw energy
from You as from an illimitable source." Then practice
believing that you receive energy. Keep in tune with the
Infinite.
Of course many people are tired simply because they are not
interested in anything. Nothing ever moves them deeply. To
some people it makes no difference what's going on or how
things go. Their personal concerns are superior even to all
crises in human history. Nothing makes any real difference
to them except their own little worries, their desires, and
their hates. They wear themselves out stewing around about
a lot of inconsequential things that amount to nothing. So
they become tired. They even become sick. The surest way
not to become tired is to lose yourself in something in which
you have a profound conviction.

46
A famous statesman who made seven speeches in one day
was still boundless in energy.
"Why are you not tired after making seven speeches?" I
asked.
"Because," he said, "I believe absolutely in everything I said
in those speeches. I am enthusiastic about my convictions."
That's the secret. He was on fire for something. He was
pouring himself out, and you never lose energy and vitality
in so doing. You only lose energy when life becomes dull in
your mind. Your mind gets bored and therefore tired doing
nothing. You don't have to be tired. Get interested in
something. Get absolutely enthralled in something. Throw
yourself into it with abandon. Get out of yourself. Be
somebody. Do something. Don't sit around moaning about
things, reading the papers, and saying, "Why don't they do
something?" The man who is out doing something isn't tired.
If you're not getting into good causes, no wonder you're
tired. You're disintegrating. You're deteriorating. You're
dying on the vine. The more you lose yourself in something
bigger than yourself, the more energy you will have. You
don't have time to think about yourself and get bogged down
in your emotional difficulties.
To live with constant energy it is important to get your
emotional faults corrected. You will never have full energy
until you do.
The late Knute Rockne, one of the greatest football coaches
this country ever produced, said that a football player cannot
have sufficient energy unless his emotions are under spiritual
control. In fact, he went so far as to say that he would not
have a man on his team who did not have a genuinely
friendly feeling for every fellow player. "I have to get the
most energy out of a man," he said, "and have discovered
that it cannot be done if he hates another man. Hate blocks
47
his energy and he isn't up to par until he eliminates it and
develops a friendly feeling." People who lack energy are
disorganized to one degree or another by their deep,
fundamental emotional and psychological conflicts.
Sometimes the results of this disorganization are extreme,
but healing is ever possible.
In a Midwestern city I was asked to talk with a man,
formerly a very active citizen of that community, who had
suffered an acute decline in vitality. It was thought by his
associates that he had had a stroke. This impression was
given by the shuffling manner in which he moved, by an
extraordinary lethargic attitude, and by his complete
detachment of himself from the activities to which he had
formerly given a large portion of his time. He sat
despondently in his chair hour after hour, and often he would
weep. He exhibited many of the symptoms of a nervous
breakdown.
I arranged to see him in my hotel room at a certain hour. My
door was open and through it I could see the elevator. I
chanced to be looking in that direction when the elevator
door opened and this man came shuffling down the hall. It
seemed that at any moment he would topple over, and he
gave every evidence of scarcely being able to negotiate the
distance. I asked him to be seated and engaged him in
conversation, which conversation was rather fruitless, for it
revealed little enlightenment because of his tendency to
complain about his condition and his inability to give
thoughtful consideration to my questions. This was
apparently due to his enormous self-pity.
When I asked him if he would like to be well, he looked up
at me in the most intense and pathetic manner. His
desperation was revealed by his answer which was that he
would give anything in the world if he could regain the
energy and the interest in life which he formerly enjoyed.
48
I began to draw out of him certain facts regarding his life and
experience. These were all of a very intimate nature and
many of them so deeply imbedded in his consciousness that
it was with the utmost difficulty that his personality yielded
them up. They had to do with old infantile attitudes, fears
that stemmed from earliest days, most ot them deriving from
the mother-child relationship. Not a few guilt situations
appeared. It seemed that over the course of the years these
factors had accumulated like drifting sand across the channel
of a river. The flow of power was gradually decreased so that
an insufficient amount of energy was passing through. The
man's mind was in such a complete state of retreating that a
process ot reasoning and enlightenment seemed quite
impossible.
I sought for guidance and found myself, quite to my surprise,
standing beside him and placing my hand upon his head. I
prayed, asking God to heal the man. I suddenly became
aware of what seemed to be the passing of power through my
hand which rested upon his head. I hasten to add that there is
no healing power in my hand, but now and then a human
being is used as a channel, and it was evidently so in this
instance, for presently the man looked up with an expression
of the utmost happiness and peace and he said simply, "He
was here. He touched me. I feel entirely different."
From this time on his improvement was pronounced, and at
the present time he is practically his old self again, except for
the fact that he now possesses a quiet and serene confidence
which was not present previously. Apparently the clogged
channel in his personality through which the passage of
power had been impeded was opened by an act of faith and
the free flow of energy was renewed.
The facts suggested by this incident are that such healings do
take place and that a gradual accumulation of psychological
factors can cut off the flow of energy. The further fact is
49
stressed that these same factors are susceptible to the power
of faith to energy within an individual.
The effect of guilt and fear feelings on energy is widely
recognized by all authorities having to do with the problems
of human nature. The quantity of vital force required to give
the personality relief from either guilt or fear or a
combination of each is so great that often only a fraction of
energy remains for the discharge of the functions of living.
Energy drainage occasioned by fear and guilt is of such an
amount as to leave little power to be applied to a person's
job. The result is that he tires quickly. Not being able to meet
the full requirements of his responsibility, he retreats into an
apathetic, dull, listless condition and is indeed even ready to
give up and fall back sleepily in a state of enervation.
A businessman was referred to me by a psychiatrist whom
the patient had been consulting. It appeared that the patient,
generally regarded as quite morally strict and upright, had
become involved with a married woman. He had attempted
to break off this relationship but was encountering resistance
from his partner in infidelity, although he had earnestly
besought her to abandon their practice and allow him to
return to his former state of respectability.
She had threatened him with the possibility that she might
enlighten her husband concerning these escapades if he
insisted in his desire to cease the relationship. The patient
recognized the fact that if the husband became apprised of
the situation, it would result in disgrace for him in his
community. He happened to be a prominent citizen and
prized his high standing.
As a result of his fear of exposure and a sense of guilt he had
been unable to sleep or rest. And since this had gone on for
two or three months he was in a very serious slump in energy
and did not possess the vitality to perform his job efficiently.
Inasmuch as some important matters were pending, the
50
situation was serious.
When the psychiatrist suggested that he see me, a clergyman,
because of his inability to sleep, he remonstrated by saying
there was no way in which a clergyman could correct the
condition which caused his sleeplessness, but, on the
contrary, he felt that a medical doctor might supply effective
medication.
When he stated his attitude to me I simply asked him how he
expected to sleep when he had two very annoying and
unpleasant bedfellows with whom he was attempting to
sleep.
"Bedfellows?" he asked in surprise. "I have no bedfellows."
"Oh, yes, you have," I said, "and there is nobody in this
world who can sleep with those two, one on either side."
"What do you mean?" he asked.
I said, "You are trying to sleep every night between fear on
one side and guilt on the other, and you are attempting an
impossible feat. It makes no difference how many sleeping
pills you take, and you admit you have taken many such
pills, but they have had no effect upon you. The reason they
do not affect you is that they cannot reach the deeper levels
of your mind where this sleeplessness originates and which
is siphoning off your energy. You must eradicate fear and
guilt before you will ever be able to sleep and regain your
strength."
We dealt with the fear which was of exposure by the simple
expedient of getting him ready in mind to face whatever
might ensue as a result of doing the right thing, which was of
course to break off the relationship regardless of
consequences. I assured him that whatever he did that was
right would turn out right. One never does wrong by doing
51
right. I urged him to put the matter in God's hands and
simply do the right thing, leaving the outcome to God.
He did that, not without trepidation, but with considerable
sincerity just the same. The woman, either through
shrewdness or some expression of her own better nature or
through the more doubtful expedient of transferring her
affections elsewhere, released him.
The guilt was handled by seeking God's forgiveness. When
this is sincerely sought it is never denied, and our patient
found surcease and relief. It was astonishing how when this
double weight was lifted from his mind his personality once
again began to function normally. He was able to sleep. He
found peace and renewal of strength. Energy quickly
returned. A wiser and thankful man, he became able to carry
on his normal activities.
A not infrequent case of diminishing energy is staleness. The
pressure, monotony, and unceasing continuity of
responsibilities dull the freshness of mind which a person
must have to approach his work successfully. As an athlete
goes stale so does the individual, whatever his occupation,
tend to come upon dry and arid periods. During such a
condition of mind the expenditure of greater energy is
required to do with difficulty what one formerly did with
comparative ease. As a result the vital powers are hard put to
it to supply the force required, and the individual often loses
his grip and power.
A solution for this state of mind was employed by a
prominent business leader, president of the board of trustees
of a certain university. A professor who had formerly been
outstanding and extraordinarily popular had begun to slip in
teaching ability and in the power to interest students. It was
the verdict of the students as well as the private opinion of
the trustees that this teacher must either recover his former
capacity to teach with interest and enthusiasm or it would be
52
necessary to replace him. This latter expedient was
entertained with hesitancy for the reason that there still
remained a normal expectancy of several active years before
he reached the age of retirement.
The businessman above referred to asked the professor to
come to his office and announced to him that the board of
trustees was giving him a six months' leave of absence with
all expenses paid and with full salary. There was only one
stipulation, and that was that he go away to a place of rest
and give himself over to gaining a complete renewal of
strength and energy.
The businessman invited him to use a cabin which he himself
owned in a wilderness setting and made the curious
suggestion that he take no books except one book, the Bible.
He suggested that the professor's daily program be walking,
fishing, and some manual work in the garden; that he read
the Bible every day for such a period as would enable him to
read the Book through three times in the six months. He
further suggested that he memorize as many passages as
possible for the purpose of saturating his mind with the great
words and ideas which the Book contains.
The businessman said, "I believe that if you spend six
months outdoors chopping wood, digging in the soil, reading
the Bible, and fishing in the deep lakes you will become a
new man."
The professor agreed to this unique proposal. His adjustment
to this radically different mode of life was an easier one than
he or anyone who knew him expected. In fact, he was
surprised to find that he actually liked it. After he became
conditioned to active outdoor living he discovered that it had
an immense appeal for him. He missed his intellectual
associates and his reading for a while, but forced back upon
the Bible, his only book, he became immersed in it, and to
his amazement found, as he put it, "a library within itself." In
53
its pages he found faith and peace and power. In six months
he was a new man.
The businessman now tells me that this professor has
become, as he puts it, "a person of compelling power."
Staleness passed away, the old-time energy returned, power
surged back, zest for living was renewed.

54
Chapter 4
Try Prayer Power
IN A BUSINESS OFFICE high above the city streets two
men were having a serious conversation. One, heavily
troubled by a business and personal crisis, paced the floor
restlessly, then sat dejectedly, head in hand, a picture of
despair. He had come to the other for advice, since he was
considered a man of great understanding. Together they had
explored the problem from every angle but seemingly
without result, which only served to deepen the troubled
man's discouragement. "I guess no power on earth can save
me," he sighed.
The other reflected for a moment, then spoke rather
diffidently. "I wouldn't look at it that way. I believe you are
wrong in saying there is no power that can save you.
Personally, I have found that there is an answer to every
problem. There is a power that can help you." Then slowly
he asked, "Why not try prayer power?"
Somewhat surprised, the discouraged man said, "Of course I
believe in prayer, but perhaps I do not know how to pray.
You speak of it as something practical that fits a business
problem. I never thought of it that way but I'm willing to try
prayer if you will show me how."
He did apply practical prayer techniques and in due course
got his answer. Matters ultimately turned out satisfactorily.
That is not to say he did not have difficulties. In fact, he had
rather a hard time of it but ultimately he worked out of this
trouble. Now he believes in prayer power so enthusiastically
that I recently heard him say, "Every problem can be solved
and solved right if you pray."
Experts in physical health and well-being often utilize prayer
55
in their therapy. Disability, tension, and kindred troubles
may result from a lack of inner harmony. It is remarkable
how prayer restores the harmonious functioning of body and
soul. A friend of mine, a physiotherapist, told a nervous man
to whom he was giving a massage, "God works through my
fingers as I seek to relax your physical body, which is the
temple of your soul. While I work on your outward being, I
want you to pray for God's relaxation inwardly." It was a
new idea to the patient, but he happened to be in a receptive
mood and he tried passing some peace thoughts through his
mind. He was amazed at the relaxing effect this had on him.
Jack Smith, operator of a health club, which is patronized by
many outstanding people, believes in the therapy of prayer
and uses it. He was at one time a prize fighter, then a truck
driver, later a taxi driver, and finally opened his health club.
He says that while he probes his patrons for physical
flabbiness he also probes for spiritual flabbiness because, he
declares, "You can't get a man physically healthy until you
get him spiritually healthy."
One day Walter Huston, the actor, sat by Jack Smith's desk.
He noted a big sign on the wall on which were penciled the
following letters: A P R P B W P R A A. In surprise Huston
asked, "What do those letters mean?"
Smith laughed and said, "They stand for 'Affirmative Prayers
Release Powers By Which Positive Results Are
Accomplished.' "
Huston's jaw dropped in astonishment. "Well, I never
expected to hear anything like that in a health club."
"I use methods like that," said Smith, "to make people
curious so they will ask what those letters mean. That gives
me an opportunity to tell them that I believe affirmative
prayers always get results."
56
Jack Smith, who helps men to keep physically fit, believes
that prayer is as important, if not more important, than
exercise, steam baths, and a rubdown. It is a vital part of the
power-releasing process.
People are doing more praying today than formerly because
they find that it adds to personal efficiency. Prayer helps
them to tap forces and to utilize strength not otherwise
available.
A famous psychologist says, "Prayer is the greatest power
available to the individual in solving his personal problems.
Its power astonishes me."
Prayer power is a manifestation of energy. Just as there exist
scientific techniques for the release of atomic energy, so are
there scientific procedures for the release of spiritual energy
through the mechanism of prayer. Exciting demonstrations of
this energizing force are evident.
Prayer power seems able even to normalize the aging
process, obviating or limiting infirmity and deterioration.
You need not lose your basic energy or vital power or
become weak and listless merely as a result of accumulating
years. It is not necessary to allow your spirit to sag or grow
stale or dull.
Prayer can freshen you up every evening and send you out
renewed each morning. You can receive guidance in
problems if prayer is allowed to permeate your subconscious,
the seat of the forces which determines whether you take
right or wrong actions. Prayer has the power to keep your
reactions correct and sound. Prayer driven deeply into your
subconscious can remake you. It releases and keeps power
flowing freely.
If you have not experienced this power, perhaps you need to
learn new techniques of prayer. It is well to study prayer
57
from an efficiency point of view. Usually the emphasis is
entirely religious though no cleavage exists between the two
concepts. Scientific spiritual practice rules out stereotyped
procedure even as it does in general science. If you have
been praying in a certain manner, even if it has brought you
blessings, which it doubtless has, perhaps you can pray even
more profitably by varying the pattern and by experimenting
with fresh prayer formulas. Get new insights; practice new
skills to attain greatest results.
It is important to realize that you are dealing with the most
tremendous power in the world when you pray. You would
not use an old-fashioned kerosene lamp for illumination.
You want the most up-to-date lighting devices. New and
fresh spiritual techniques are being constantly discovered by
men and women of spiritual genius. It is advisable to
experiment with prayer power according to such methods as
prove sound and effective. If this sounds new and strangely
scientific, bear in mind that the secret of prayer is to find the
process that will most effectively open your mind humbly to
God. Any method through which you can stimulate the
power of God to flow into your mind is legitimate and
usable.
An illustration of a scientific use of prayer is the experience
of two famous industrialists, whose names would be known
to many readers were I permitted to mention them, who had
a conference about a business and technical matter. One
might think that these men would approach such a problem
on a purely technical basis, and they did that and more; they
also prayed about it. But they did not get a successful result.
Therefore they called in a country preacher, an old friend of
one of them, because, as they explained, the Bible prayer
formula is, "Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matthew 18:20)
They also pointed to a further formula, namely, "If two of
you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall
58
ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
heaven." (Matthew 18:19)
Being schooled in scientific practice, they believe that in
dealing with prayer as a phenomenon they should
scrupulously follow the formulas outlined in the Bible which
they described as the textbook of spiritual science. The
proper method for employing a science is to use the accepted
formulas outlined in the textbook of that science. They
reasoned that if the Bible provides that two or three should
be gathered together, perhaps the reason they were not
succeeding was that they needed a third party.
Therefore the three men prayed, and to guard against error in
the process they also brought to bear on the problem various
other Biblical techniques such as those suggested in the
statements: "According to your faith be it unto
you." (Matthew 9:29) "What things soever ye desire, when
ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have
them." (Mark 11:24)
After several thoroughgoing sessions of prayer the three men
together affirmed that they had received the answer. The
outcome was entirely satisfactory. Subsequent results
indicated that Divine guidance was actually obtained.
These men are great enough scientists not to require precise
explanation of the operation of these spiritual laws any more
than in the case of naturalistic laws but are content with the
fact that the law does operate when "proper" techniques are
employed.
"While we cannot explain it," they said, "the fact remains
that we were baffled by our problem and we tried prayer
according to the formulas in the New Testament. That
method worked and we got a beautiful result." They did add
that it seemed to them that faith and harmony are important
factors in the prayer process.
59
A man opened a small business in New York City a number
of years ago, his first establishment being, as he
characterized it, "a little hole in the wall." He had one
employee. In a few years they moved into a larger room and
then into extensive quarters. It became a very successful
operation.
This man's method of business as he described it was "to fill
the little hole in the wall with optimistic prayers and
thoughts." He declared that hard work, positive thinking, fair
dealing, right treatment of people, and the proper kind of
praying always get results. This man, who has a creative and
unique mind, worked out his own simple formula for solving
his problems and overcoming his difficulties through prayer
power. It is a curious formula but I have practiced it and
personally know that it works. I have suggested it to many
people who also found real value in its use. It is
recommended to you.
The formula is (1) PRAYERIZE, (2) PICTURIZE, (3)
ACTUALIZE.
By "prayerize" my friend meant a daily system of creative
prayer. When a problem arose he talked it over with God
very simply and directly in prayer. Moreover, he did not talk
with God as to some vast and far-off shadowy being but
conceived of God as being with him in his office, in his
home, on the street, in his automobile, always near by as a
partner, as a close associate. He took seriously the Biblical
injunction to "pray without ceasing." He interpreted it as
meaning that he should go about every day discussing with
God in a natural, normal manner the questions that had to be
decided and dealt with. The Presence came finally to
dominate his conscious and ultimately his unconscious
thinking. He "prayerized" his daily life. He prayed as he
walked or drove his car or performed other everyday
activities. He filled his daily life full of prayer—that is, he
60
lived by prayer. He did not often kneel to offer his prayers
but would, for example, say to God as to a close associate,
"What will I do about this, Lord?" or "Give me a fresh
insight on this, Lord." He prayerized his mind and so
prayerized his activities.
The second point in his formula of creative prayer is to
"picturize." The basic factor in physics is force. The basic
factor in psychology is the realizable wish. The man who
assumes success tends already to have success. People who
assume failure tend to have failure. When either failure or
success is picturized it strongly tends to actualize in terms
equivalent to the mental image pictured.
To assure something worthwhile happening, first pray about
it and test it according to God's will; then print a picture of it
on your mind as happening, holding the picture firmly in
consciousness. Continue to surrender the picture to God's
will—that is to say, put the matter in God's hands—and
follow God's guidance. Work hard and intelligently, thus
doing your part to achieve success in the matter. Practice
believing and continue to hold the picturization firmly in
your thoughts. Do this and you will be astonished at the
strange ways in which the picturization comes to pass. In this
manner the picture "actualizes." That which you have
"prayerized" and "picturized" "actualizes" according to the
pattern of your basic realizable wish when conditioned by
invoking God's power upon it, and if, moreover, you give
fully of yourself to its realization.
I have personally practiced this three-point prayer method
and find great power in it. It has been suggested to others
who have likewise reported that it released creative power
into their experience.
For example, a woman discovered that her husband was
drifting from her. Theirs had been a happy marriage, but the
61
wife had become preoccupied in social affairs and the
husband had gotten busy in his work. Before they knew it,
the close, old-time companionship was lost. One day she
discovered his interest in another woman. She lost her head
and became hysterical. She consulted her minister, who
adroitly turned the conversation to herself. She admitted
being a careless homemaker and that she had also become
self-centered, sharp-tongued, and nagging.
She then confessed that she had never felt herself the equal
of her husband. She had a profound sense of inferiority
regarding him, feeling unable to maintain equality with him
socially and intellectually. So she retreated into an
antagonistic attitude that manifested itself in petulance and
criticism.
The minister saw that the woman had more talent, ability,
and charm than she was revealing. He suggested that she
create an image or picture of herself as capable and
attractive. He whimsically told her that "God runs a beauty
parlor" and that faith techniques could put beauty on a
person's face and charm and ease in her manner. He gave her
instruction in how to pray and how spiritually to "picturize."
He also advised her to hold a mental image of the restoration
of the old-time companionship, to visualize the goodness in
her husband, and to picture a restored harmony between the
two of them. She was to hold this picture with faith. In this
manner he prepared her for a most interesting personal
victory.
About this time her husband informed her that he wanted a
divorce. She had conquered herself to the extent of being
able to receive this request with calmness. She simply replied
that she was willing if he wanted it, but suggested a deferral
of the decision for ninety days on the ground that divorce is
so final. "If at the end of ninety days you still feel that you
want a divorce, I will co-operate with you." She said this
62
calmly. He gave her a quizzical look, for he had expected an
outburst.
Night after night he went out, and night after night she sat at
home, but she pictured him as seated in his old chair. He was
not in the chair, but she painted an image of him there
comfortably reading as in the old days. She visualized him
pottering around the house, painting and fixing things as he
had formerly done. She even pictured him drying the dishes
as he did when they were first married. She visualized the
two of them playing golf together and taking hikes as they
once did.
She maintained this picture with steady faith, and one night
there he actually sat in his old chair. She looked twice to be
sure that it was the reality rather than the picturization, but
perhaps a picturization is a reality, for at any rate the actual
man was there. Occasionally he would be gone but more and
more nights he sat in his chair. Then he began to read to her
as in the old days. Then one sunny Saturday afternoon he
asked, "What do you say to a game of golf?"
The days went by pleasantly until she realized that the
ninetieth day had arrived, so that evening she said quietly,
"Bill, this is the ninetieth day."
"What do you mean," he asked, puzzled, "the ninetieth day?"
"Why, don't you remember? We agreed to wait ninety days
to settle that divorce matter and this is the day."
He looked at her for a moment, then hidden behind his paper
turned a page, saying, "Don't be silly. I couldn't possibly get
along without you. Where did you ever get the idea I was
going to leave you?"
The formula proved a powerful mechanism. She prayerized,
she picturized, and the sought-for result was actualized.
63
Prayer power solved her problem and his as well.
I have known many people who have successfully applied
this technique not only to personal affairs but to business
matters as well. When sincerely and intelligently brought
into situations, the results have been so excellent that this
must be regarded as an extraordinarily efficient method of
prayer. People who take this method seriously and actually
use it get astonishing results.
At an industrial convention banquet I was seated at the
speaker's table next to a man who, though a bit on the rough
side, was very likable. He may have felt a bit cramped by his
proximity to a preacher, which obviously wasn't his usual
company. During the dinner he used a number of theological
words, but they were not put together in a theological
manner. After each outburst he apologized, but I advised him
that I had heard all those words before.
He told me he had been a church attendant as a boy but "had
gotten away from it." He gave me that old story which I have
heard all my life and which even now people will get off as
something entirely new, viz., "When I was a boy my father
made me go to Sunday school and church and crammed
religion down my throat. So when I got away from home I
couldn't take it any more and have seldom been to church
since."
This man then observed that "perhaps he should start going
to church since he was getting old." I commented that he
would be lucky to find a seat. This surprised him for he "did
not think anybody went to church any more." I told him that
more people attend church each week than frequent any
other institution in the country. This rather bowled him over.
He was head of a medium-sized business and he fell to
telling me how much money his firm took in last year. I told
him I knew quite a few churches whose take exceeded that.
64
This really hit him in the solar plexus, and I noted his respect
for the church mounting by leaps and bounds. I told him
about the thousands of religious books that are sold, more
than any other type of book. "Maybe you fellows in the
church are on the ball at that," he slangily remarked.
At this moment another man came up to our table and
enthusiastically told me that "something wonderful" had
happened to him. He said he had been very depressed, for
things hadn't been going well with him. He decided to get
away for a week or so and on this vacation read one of my
books in which practical faith techniques are outlined. He
said this brought him the first satisfaction and peace he had
felt. It encouraged him as to his own possibilities. He began
to believe that the answer to his trouble was practical
religion.
"So," he said, "I began to practice the spiritual principles
presented in your book. I began to believe and affirm that
with God's help the objectives I was endeavoring to
accomplish could be achieved. A feeling came over me that
everything was going to be all right, and from then on
nothing could upset me. I absolutely knew it was going to be
O.K. - So I began to sleep better and feel better. I felt as if I
had taken a tonic. My new understanding and practice of
spiritual techniques were the turning point."
When he left us, my table companion, who had listened in on
this recital, said, "I never heard anything like that before.
That fellow talks about religion as happy and workable. It
was never presented to me that way. He also gives the
impression that religion is almost a science, that you can use
it to improve your health and do better in your job. I never
thought of religion in that connection."
Then he added, "But do you know what struck me? It was
the look on that guy's face."
65
Now the curious fact is that when my table companion made
that statement a semblance of the same look was on his own
face. For the first time he was getting the idea that religious
faith is not something piously stuffy but is a scientific
procedure for successful living. He was observing at
firsthand the practical working of prayer power in personal
experience.
Personally, I believe that prayer is a sending out of vibrations
from one person to another and to God. All of the universe is
in vibration. There are vibrations in the molecules of a table.
The air is filled with vibrations. The reaction between human
beings is also in vibration. When you send out a prayer for
another person, you employ the force inherent in a spiritual
universe. You transport from yourself to the other person a
sense of love, helpfulness, support—a sympathetic, powerful
understanding—and in this process you awaken vibrations in
the universe through which God brings to pass the good
objectives prayed for. Experiment with this principle and you
will know its amazing results.
For example, I have a habit, which I often use, of praying for
people as I pass them. I remember being on a train traveling
through West Virginia when I had a curious thought. I saw a
man standing on a station platform, then the train moved on
and he passed from sight. It occurred to me that I was seeing
him for the first and last time. His life and mine touched
lightly for just a fraction of an instant. He went his way and I
went mine. I wondered how his life would turn out.
Then I prayed for that man, sending out an affirmative prayer
that his life would be filled with blessings. Then I began
praying for other people I saw as the train passed. I prayed
for a man plowing in the field and asked the Lord to help
him and give him a good crop. I saw a mother hanging up
clothes, and that line of freshly washed garments told me she
had a large family. A glimpse of her face and the way in
66
which she handled the clothes of the children told me she
was a happy woman. I prayed for her, that she would have a
happy life, that her husband would always be true to her and
that she would be true to him. I prayed that they might be a
religious family and that the children would grow up strong,
honorable young people.
In one station I saw a man leaning half asleep against a wall,
and I prayed that he would wake up and get off relief and
amount to something.
Then we stopped at a station, and there was a lovable little
kid, one pants leg longer than the other, shirt open at the
neck, wearing a too-big sweater, hair tousled, face dirty. He
was sucking a lollipop and working hard on it. I prayed for
him, and as the train started to move he looked up at me and
gave me the most wonderful smile. I knew my prayer had
caught him, and I waved to him, and he waved back at me. I
shall never see that boy again in all likelihood, but our lives
touched. It had been a cloudy day up to that point, but
suddenly the sun came out and I think there was a light in the
boy's heart, for it was revealed on his face. I know that my
heart felt happy. I am sure it was because the power of God
was moving in a circuit through me, to the boy and back to
God; and we were all under the spell of prayer power.
One of the important functions of prayer is as a stimulus to
creative ideas. Within the mind are all of the resources
needed for successful living. Ideas are present in
consciousness which, when released and given scope
together with proper implementation, can lead to the
successful operation of any project or undertaking. When the
New Testament says, "The kingdom of God is within
you," (Luke 17:21) it is informing us that God our Creator
has laid up within our minds and personalities all the
potential powers and ability we need for constructive living.
It remains for us to tap and develop these powers.
67
For example, a man of my acquaintance is connected with a
business where he is the chief of four executives. At regular
intervals these men have what they call an "idea session," the
purpose of which is to tap all the creative ideas lurking in the
minds of any of the four. For this session they use a room
without telephones, buzzers, or other usual office equipment.
The double window is fully insulated so that street noises are
for the most part eliminated.
Before starting the session the group spends ten minutes in
silent prayer and meditation. They conceive of God as
creatively working in their minds. Each in his own way
silently prays, affirming that God is about to release from his
mind the proper ideas needed in the business.
Following the quiet period all start talking, pouring out ideas
that have come to their minds. Memos of the ideas are
written upon cards and thrown on the table. No one is
permitted to criticize any idea at this particular juncture for
argument might stop the flow of creative thought. The cards
are gathered up and each one is evaluated at a later session;
but this is the idea-tapping session, stimulated by prayer
power.
When this practice was inaugurated a high percentage of the
ideas suggested proved to be without particular value, but as
the sessions continued the percentage of good ideas
increased. Now many of the best suggestions which have
later demonstrated their practical value were evolved in the
"idea session."
As one of the executives explained, "We have come up with
insights that not only show on our balance sheet but we have
also gained a new feeling of confidence. Moreover, there is a
deeper feeling of fellowship among the four of us and this
has spread to others in the organization."
Where is the old-fashioned businessman who says that
68
religion is theoretical and has no place in business? Today
any successful and competent businessman will employ the
latest and best-tested methods in production, distribution,
and administration, and many are discovering that one of the
greatest of all efficiency methods is prayer power.
Alert people everywhere are finding that by trying prayer
power they feel better, work better, do better, sleep better,
are better.
My friend Grove Patterson, editor of the Toledo Blade, is a
man of remarkable vigor. He says that his energy results, in
part at least, from his methods of prayer. For example, he
likes to fall asleep while praying, for he believes that his
subconscious is most relaxed at that time. It is in the
subconscious that our life is largely governed. If you drop a
prayer into the subconscious at the moment of its greatest
relaxation, the prayer has a powerful effect. Mr. Patterson
chuckled as he said, "Once it worried me because I would
fall asleep while praying. Now I actually try to have it so."
Many unique methods of prayer have come to my attention,
but one of the most effective is that advocated by Frank
Laubach in his excellent book, Prayer, the Mightiest Power
in the World. I regard this as one of the most practical books
on prayer, for it outlines fresh prayer techniques that work.
Dr. Laubach believes that actual power is generated by
prayer. One of his methods is to walk down the street and
"shoot" prayers at people. He calls this type of praying,
"flash prayers." He bombards passers-by with prayers,
sending out thoughts of good will and love. He says that
people passing him on the street as he "shoots" prayers at
them often turn around and look at him and smile. They feel
the emanation of a power like electrical energy.
In a bus he "shoots" prayers at his fellow passengers. Once
he was sitting behind a man who seemed to be very gloomy.
He had noticed when he entered the bus that the man had a
69
scowl on his face. He began to send out toward him prayers
of good will and faith, conceiving of these prayers as
surrounding him and driving into his mind. Suddenly the
man began to stroke the back of his head, and when he left
the bus the scowl was gone and a smile had replaced it. Dr.
Laubach believes that he has often changed the entire
atmosphere of a car or bus full of people by the process of
"swishing love and prayers all around the place."
In a Pullman club car a half-intoxicated man was quite
boorish and rude, talking in an overbearing manner and
generally making himself obnoxious. I felt that everyone in
the car took a dislike to him. Halfway down the car from him
I determined to try Frank Laubach's method. So I started to
pray for him, meanwhile visualizing his better self and
sending out thoughts of good will toward him. Presently, for
no seemingly apparent reason, the man turned in my
direction, gave me a most disarming smile, and raised his
hand in the gesture of salute. His attitude changed and he
became quiet. I have every reason to believe that the prayer
thoughts effectively reached out toward him.
It is my practice before making a speech to any audience to
pray for the people present and to send out thoughts of love
and good will toward them. Sometimes I select out of the
audience one or two people who seem to be either depressed
or even antagonistic and send my prayer thoughts and goodwill attitude specifically toward them. Recently addressing a
Chamber of Commerce annual dinner in a southwestern city,
I noted a man in the audience who seemed to be scowling at
me. It was altogether possible that his facial expression was
not in any way related to me, but he seemed antagonistic.
Before starting to speak I prayed for him and "shot" a series
of prayers and good-will thoughts in his direction. As I
spoke, I continued to do this.
When the meeting was over, while shaking hands with those
70
around me, suddenly my hand was caught in a tremendous
clasp and I was looking into the face of the man. He was
smiling broadly. "Frankly I did not like you when I came to
this meeting," he said. "I do not like preachers and saw no
reason for having you, a minister, as speaker at our Chamber
of Commerce dinner. I was hoping that your speech would
not be successful. However, as you spoke something seemed
to touch me. I feel like a new person. I had a strange sense of
peace—and doggone it, I like you!"
It was not my speech that had this effect. It was the
emanation of prayer power. In our brains we have about two
billion little storage batteries. The human brain can send off
power by thoughts and prayers. The human body's magnetic
power has actually been tested. We have thousands of little
sending stations, and when these are turned up by prayer it is
possible for a tremendous power to flow through a person
and to pass between human beings. We can send off power
by prayer which acts as both a sending and receiving station.
There was a man, an alcoholic, with whom I had been
working. He had been "dry" (as the Alcoholics Anonymous
term it) for about six months. He was on a business trip, and
one Tuesday afternoon about four o'clock I had a strong
impression that he was in trouble. This man dominated my
thoughts. I felt something drawing me so I dropped
everything and started praying for him. I prayed for about a
half-hour, then the impression seemed to let up and I
discontinued my prayers.
A few days later he telephoned me. "I have been in Boston
all week," he said, "and I want you to know I'm still 'dry,' but
early in the week I had a very hard time."
"Was it on Tuesday at four o'clock?" I asked.
Astonished, he replied, "Why, yes, how did you know? Who
told you?"
71
"Nobody told me," I replied. "That is, no human told me." I
described my feelings concerning him on Tuesday at four
o'clock and told about praying for him for half an hour.
He was astounded, and explained, "I was at the hotel and
stopped in front of the bar. I had a terrible struggle with
myself. I thought of you, for I needed help badly right then,
and I started to pray."
Those prayers starting out from him reached me, and I began
to pray for him. Both of us joining in prayer completed the
circuit, and reached God, and the man got his answer in the
form of strength to meet the crisis. And what did he do?
He went to a drugstore, bought a box of candy, and ate all of
it without stopping. That pulled him through, he declared—
"prayer and candy."
A young married woman admitted she was filled with hates,
also very apprehensive, always worrying about her children,
whether they would be sick or get into an accident or fail in
school. Her life was a pathetic mixture of dissatisfaction,
fear, hate, and unhappiness. I asked her if she ever prayed.
She said, "Only when I get so up against it that I am just
desperate; but I must admit that prayer doesn't mean
anything to me, so I don't pray very often."
I suggested that the practice of real prayer could change her
life and gave her some instructions in sending out love
thoughts instead of hate thoughts and confidence thoughts
instead of fear thoughts. I suggested that every day at the
time for the children to come home from school she pray,
and make her prayers an affirmation of God's protective
goodness. Doubtful at first, she became one of the most
enthusiastic advocates and practicers of prayer I have ever
known. She avidly reads books and pamphlets and practices
every effective prayer-power technique. This procedure
72
revamped her life as is illustrated by the following letter
which she wrote me recently:
"I feel that my husband and I have both made wonderful
progress in the last few weeks. My greatest progress dates
from the night you told me that 'every day is a good day if
you pray.' I began to put into practice the idea of affirming
that this would be a good day the minute I woke up in the
morning, and I can positively say that I have not had a bad or
upsetting day since that time. The amazing thing is that my
days actually haven't been any smoother or anymore free
from petty annoyances than they ever were, but they just
don't seem to have the power to upset me any more. Every
night I begin my prayers by listing all the things for which I
am grateful, little things that happened during the day which
added to the happiness of my day. I know that this habit has
geared my mind to pick out the nice things and forget the
unpleasant ones. The fact that for six weeks I have not had a
single bad day and have refused to get downhearted with
anyone is really marvelous to me."
She discovered amazing power in trying prayer power. You
can do the same. Following are ten rules for getting effective
results from prayer:
1. Set aside a few minutes every day. Do not say anything.
Simply practice thinking about God. This will make your
mind spiritually receptive.
2. Then pray orally, using simple, natural words. Tell God
anything that is on your mind. Do not think you must use
stereotyped pious phrases. Talk to God in your own
language. He understands it.
3. Pray as you go about the business of the day, on the
subway or bus or at your desk. Utilize minute prayers by
closing your eyes to shut out the world and concentrating
briefly on God's presence. The more you do this every day
73
the nearer you will feel God's presence.
4. Do not always ask when you pray, but instead affirm that
God's blessings are being given, and spend most of your
prayers giving thanks.
5. Pray with the belief that sincere prayers can reach out and
surround your loved ones with God's love and protection.
6. Never use a negative thought in prayer. Only positive
thoughts get results.
7. Always express willingness to accept God's will. Ask for
what you want, but be willing to take what God gives you. It
may be better than what you ask for.
8. Practice the attitude of putting everything in God's hands.
Ask for the ability to do your best and to leave the results
confidently to God.
9. Pray for people you do not like or who have mistreated
you. Resentment is blockade number one of spiritual power.
10. Make a list of people for whom to pray. The more you
pray for other people, especially those not connected with
you, the more prayer results will come back to you.

74
Chapter 5
How to Create Your Own Happiness
WHO DECIDES WHETHER you shall be happy or
unhappy? The answer—you do!
A television celebrity had as a guest on his program an aged
man. And he was a very rare old man indeed. His remarks
were entirely unpremeditated and of course absolutely
unrehearsed. They simply bubbled up out of a personality
that was radiant and happy. And whenever he said anything,
it was so naive, so apt, that the audience roared with
laughter. They loved him. The celebrity was impressed, and
enjoyed it with the others.
Finally he asked the old man why he was so happy. "You
must have a wonderful secret of happiness," he suggested.
"No," replied the old man, "I haven't any great secret. It's just
as plain as the nose on your face. When I get up in the
morning," he explained, "I have two choices—either to be
happy or to be unhappy, and what do you think I do? I just
choose to be happy, and that's all there is to it."
That may seem an oversimplification, and it may appear that
the old man was superficial, but I recall that Abraham
Lincoln, whom nobody could accuse of being superficial,
said that people were just about as happy as they made up
their minds to be. You can be unhappy if you want to be. It is
the easiest thing in the world to accomplish. Just choose
unhappiness. Go around telling yourself that things aren't
going well, that nothing is satisfactory, and you can be quite
sure of being unhappy. But say to yourself, "Things are
going nicely. Life is good. I choose happiness," and you can
be quite certain of having your choice.
Children are more expert in happiness than adults. The adult
75
who can carry the spirit of a child into middle and old age is
a genius, for he will preserve the truly happy spirit with
which God endowed the young. The subtlety of Jesus Christ
is remarkable, for He tells us that the way to live in this
world is to have the childlike heart and mind. In other words,
never get old or dull or jaded in spirit. Don't become supersophisticated.
My little daughter Elizabeth, aged nine, has the answer to
happiness. One day I asked her, "Are you happy, honey?"
"Sure I'm happy," she replied.
"Are you always happy?" I asked.
"Sure," she answered, "I'm always happy."
"What makes you happy?" I asked her.
"Why, I don't know," she said, "I'm just happy."
"There must be something that makes you happy," I urged.
"Well," she said, "I'll tell you what it is. My playmates, they
make me happy. I like them. My school makes me happy. I
like to go to school. (I didn't say anything, but she never got
that from me.) I like my teachers. And I like to go to church.
I like Sunday school and my Sunday-school teacher. I love
my sister Margaret and my brother John. I love my mother
and father. They take care of me when I'm sick, and they
love me and are good to me."
That is Elizabeth's formula for happiness, and it seems to me
that it's all there—her playmates (that's her associates), her
school (the place where she works), her church and Sunday
school (where she worships), her sister, brother, mother, and
father (that means the home circle where love is found).
There you have happiness in a nutshell, and the happiest time
76
of your life is in relation to those factors.
A group of boys and girls were asked to list the things that
made them happiest. Their answers were rather touching.
Here is the boys' list: "A swallow flying; looking into deep,
clear water; water being cut at the bow of a boat; a fast train
rushing; a builder's crane lifting something heavy; my dog's
eyes."
And here is what the girls said made them happy: "Street
lights on the river; red roofs in the trees; smoke rising from a
chimney; red velvet; the moon in the clouds." There is
something in the beautiful essence of the universe that is
expressed, though only half-articulated, by these things. To
become a happy person have a clean soul, eyes that see
romance in the commonplace, a child's heart, and spiritual
simplicity.
Many of us manufacture our own unhappiness. Of course not
all unhappiness is self-created, for social conditions are
responsible for not a few of our woes. Yet it is a fact that to a
large extent by our thoughts and attitudes we distill out of the
ingredients of life either happiness or unhappiness for
ourselves.
"Four people out of five are not so happy as they can be,"
declares an eminent authority, and he adds, "Unhappiness is
the most common state of mind." Whether human happiness
strikes as low, a level as this, I would hesitate to say, but I do
find more people living unhappy lives than I would care to
compute. Since a fundamental desire of every human being
is for that state of existence called happiness, something
should be done about it. Happiness is achievable and the
process for obtaining it is not complicated. Anyone who
desires it, who wills it, and who learns and applies the right
formula may become a happy person.
In a railroad dining car I sat across from a husband and wife,
77
strangers to me. The lady was expensively dressed, as the
furs, diamonds, and costume which she wore indicated. But
she was having a most unpleasant time with herself. Rather
loudly she proclaimed that the car was dingy and drafty, the
service abominable, and the food most unpalatable. She
complained and fretted about everything.
Her husband, on the contrary, was a genial, affable,
easygoing man who obviously had the capacity to take things
as they came. I thought he seemed a bit embarrassed by his
wife's critical attitude and somewhat disappointed, too, as he
was taking her on this trip for pleasure.
To change the conversation he asked what business I was in,
and then said that he was a lawyer. Then he made a big
mistake, for with a grin he added, "My wife is in the
manufacturing business."
This was surprising, for she did not seem to be the industrial
or executive type, so I asked, "What does she manufacture?"
"Unhappiness," he replied. "She manufactures her own
unhappiness."
Despite the icy coolness that settled upon the table following
this ill-advised observation, I was grateful for his remark, for
it describes exactly what so many people do—"They
manufacture their own unhappiness."
It is a pity, too, for there are so many problems created by
life itself that dilute our happiness that it is indeed most
foolish to distill further unhappiness within your own mind.
How foolish to manufacture personal unhappiness to add to
all the other difficulties over which you have little or no
control!
Rather than to emphasize the manner in which people
manufacture their own unhappiness, let us proceed to the
78
formula for putting an end to this misery-producing process.
Suffice it to say that we manufacture our unhappiness by
thinking unhappy thoughts, by the attitudes which we
habitually take, such as the negative feeling that everything
is going to turn out badly, or that other people are getting
what they do not deserve and we are failing to get what we
do deserve.
Our unhappiness is further distilled by saturating the
consciousness with feelings of resentment, ill will, and hate.
The unhappiness-producing process always makes important
use of the ingredients of fear and worry. Each of these
matters is dealt with elsewhere in this book. We merely want
to make the point at the present time and stress it forcefully
that a very large proportion of the unhappiness of the average
individual is self-manufactured. How, then, may we proceed
to produce not unhappiness but happiness?
An incident from one of my railroad journeys may suggest
an answer. One morning in an old-style Pullman car
approximately a half-dozen of us were shaving in the men's
lounge. As always in such close and crowded quarters after a
night on the train, this group of strangers was not disposed to
be gay, and there was little conversation and that little was
mostly mumbled.
Then a man came in wearing on his face a broad smile. He
greeted us all with a cheery good morning, but received
rather unenthusiastic grunts in return. As he went about his
shaving he was humming, probably quite unconsciously, a
gay little tune. It got a bit on the nerves of some of the men.
Finally one said rather sarcastically, "You certainly seem to
be happy this morning! Why all the cheer?"
"Yes," the man answered, "as a matter of fact, I am happy. I
do feel cheerful." Then he added, "I make it a habit to be
happy."
79
That is all that was said, but I am sure that each man in that
lounge left the train with those interesting words in mind. "I
make it a habit to be happy."
The statement is really very profound, for our happiness or
unhappiness depends to an important degree upon the habit
of mind we cultivate. That collection of wise sayings, the
book of Proverbs, tells us that "...he that is of a merry heart
hath a continual feast." (Proverbs 15:15) In other words,
cultivate the merry heart; that is, develop the happiness habit,
and life will become a continual feast, which is to say you
can enjoy life every day. Out of the happiness habit comes a
happy life. And because we can cultivate a habit, we
therefore have the power to create our own happiness.
The happiness habit is developed by simply practicing happy
thinking. Make a mental list of happy thoughts and pass
them through your mind several times every day. If an
unhappiness thought should enter your mind, immediately
stop, consciously eject it, and substitute a happiness thought.
Every morning before arising, lie relaxed in bed and
deliberately drop happy thoughts into your conscious mind.
Let a series of pictures pass across your mind of each happy
experience you expect to have during the day. Savor their
joy. Such thoughts will help cause events to turn out that
way. Do not affirm that things will not go well that day. By
merely saying that, you can actually help to make it so. You
will draw to yourself every factor, large and small, that will
contribute to unhappy conditions. As a result, you will find
yourself asking, "Why does everything go badly for me?
What is the matter with everything?"
The reason can be directly traced to the manner in which you
begin the day in your thoughts.
Tomorrow try this plan instead. When you arise, say out loud
three times this one sentence, "This is the day which the
Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it." (Psalm
80
118:24) Only personalize it and say, "I will rejoice and be
glad in it." Repeat it in a strong, clear voice and with positive
tone and emphasis. The statement, of course, is from the
Bible and it is a good cure for unhappiness. If you repeat that
one sentence three times before breakfast and meditate on
the meaning of the words you will change the character of
the day by starting off with a happiness psychology.
While dressing or shaving or getting breakfast, say aloud a
few such remarks as the following, "I believe this is going to
be a wonderful day. I believe I can successfully handle all
problems that will arise today. I feel good physically,
mentally, emotionally. It is wonderful to be alive. I am
grateful for all that I have had, for all that I now have, and
for all that I shall have. Things aren't going to fall apart. God
is here and He is with me and He will see me through. I
thank God for every good thing."
I once knew an unhappy sort of fellow who always said to
his wife at breakfast, "This is going to be another tough day."
He didn't really think so, but he had a mental quirk whereby
if he said it was going to be a tough day, it might turn out
pretty well. But things really started going badly with him,
which was not surprising, for if you visualize and affirm an
unhappy outcome, you tend thereby to create just that type of
condition. So affirm happy outcomes at the start of every
day, and you will be surprised at how often things will turn
out so.
But it is not sufficient to apply to the mind even such an
important affirmation therapy as I have just suggested unless
throughout the day you also base your actions and attitudes
upon fundamental principles of happy living.
One of the most simple and basic of such principles is that of
human love and good will. It is amazing what happiness a
sincere expression of compassion and tenderness will induce.
81
My friend Dr. Samuel Shoemaker once wrote a moving story
about a mutual friend, Ralston Young, famous as Redcap No.
42 in the Grand Central Station in New York. He carries
bags for a living, but his real job is living the spirit of Christ
as a redcap in one of the world's greatest railway stations. As
he carries a man's suitcase, he tries to share a little Christian
fellowship with him. He carefully watches a customer to see
if there is any way in which he can give him more courage
and hope. He is very skillful in the way he goes about it too.
One day, for example, he was asked to take a little old lady
to her train. She was in a wheel chair, so he took her down
on the elevator. As he wheeled her into the elevator he
noticed that there were tears in her eyes. Ralston Young
stood there as the elevator descended, closed his eyes, and
asked the Lord how he could help her, and the Lord gave
him an idea. As he wheeled her off the elevator, he said with
a smile, "Ma'am, if you don't mind my saying so, that is a
mighty pretty hat you are wearing."
She looked up at him and said, "Thank you."
"And I might add," he said, "that sure is a pretty dress you
have on. I like it so much."
Being a woman, this appealed to her, and despite the fact that
she was not feeling well, she brightened up and asked, "Why
in the world did you say those nice things to me? It is very
thoughtful of you."
"Well," he said, "I saw how unhappy you were. I saw that
you were crying, and I just asked the Lord how I could help
you. The Lord said, 'Speak to her about her hat.' The mention
of the dress," he added, "was my own idea." Ralston Young
and the Lord together knew how to get a woman's mind off
her troubles.
"Don't you feel well?" he then asked.
82
"No," she replied. "I am constantly in pain. I am never free
from it. Sometimes I think I can't stand it. Do you, by any
chance, know what it means to be in pain all the time?"
Ralston had an answer. "Yes, ma'am, I do, for I lost an eye,
and it hurt like a hot iron day and night."
"But," she said, "you seem to be happy now. How did you
accomplish it?"
By this time he had her in her seat in the train, and he said,
"Just by prayer, ma'am, just by prayer."
Softly she asked, "Does prayer, just prayer, take your pain
away?"
"Well," answered Ralston, "perhaps it doesn't always take it
away. I can't say that it does, but it always helps to overcome
it so it doesn't seem like it hurts so much. Just keep on
prayin', ma'am, and I'll pray for you too."
Her tears were dried now, and she looked up at him with a
lovely smile, took him by the hand, and said, "You've done
me so much good."
A year passed, and one night in Grand Central Station
Ralston Young was paged to come to the Information booth.
A young woman was there who said, "I bring you a message
from the dead. Before she died my mother told me to find
you and to tell you how much you helped her last year when
you took her to the train in her wheel chair. She will always
remember you, even in eternity. She will remember you, for
you were so kind and loving and understanding." Then the
young woman burst into tears and sobbed in her grief.
Ralston stood quietly watching her. Then he said, "Don't cry,
missy, don't cry. You shouldn't cry. Give a prayer of
thanksgiving."
83
Surprised, the girl said, "Why should I give a prayer of
thanksgiving?"
"Because," said Ralston, "many people have become orphans
much younger than you. You had your mother for a long,
long time, and besides you still have her. You will see her
again. She is near to you now and she always will be near to
you. Maybe," he, said, "she is right with us now—the two of
us, as we talk."
The sobs ended and the tears dried. Ralston's kindness had
the same effect on the daughter as it had had on the mother.
In this huge station, with thousands of people passing by, the
two of them felt the presence of one who inspired this
wonderful redcap to go around this way spreading love.
"Where love is," said Tolstoy, "God is," and, we might add,
where God and love are, there is happiness. So a practical
principle in creating happiness is to practice love.
A genuinely happy man is a friend of mine, H.C. Mattern,
who, with his equally happy wife, Mary, travels throughout
the country in the course of his work. Mr. Mattern carries a
unique business card on the reverse side of which is stated
the philosophy which has brought happiness to him and his
wife and to hundreds of others who have been so fortunate as
to feel the impact of their personalities.
The card reads as follows: "The way to happiness: keep your
heart free from hate, your mind from worry. Live simply,
expect little, give much. Fill your life with love. Scatter
sunshine. Forget self, think of others. Do as you would be
done by. Try this for a week and you will be surprised."
As you read these words you may say, "There is nothing new
in that." Indeed, there is something new in it if you have
never tried it. When you start to practice it you will find it
the newest, freshest, most astonishing method of happy and
84
successful living you have ever used. What is the value of
having known these principles all your life if you have never
made use of them? Such inefficiency in living is tragic. For a
man to have lived in poverty when all the time right on his
doorstep is gold indicates an unintelligent approach to life.
This simple philosophy is the way to happiness. Practice
these principles for just one week, as Mr. Mattern suggests,
and if it has not brought you the beginnings of real
happiness, then your unhappiness is very deep seated indeed.
Of course in order to give power to these principles of
happiness and make them work it is necessary to support
them with a dynamic quality of mind. You are not likely to
secure effective results; even with spiritual principles
without spiritual power. When one experiences a dynamic
spiritual change inwardly, success with happiness-producing
ideas becomes extraordinarily easy. If you begin to use
spiritual principles, however awkwardly, you will gradually
experience spiritual power inwardly. I can assure you that
this will give you the greatest surge of happiness you have
ever known. It will stay with you, too, as long as you live a
God-centered life.
In my travels about the country I have been encountering an
increasing number of genuinely happy individuals. These are
persons who have been practicing the techniques described
in this book and which I have presented in other volumes and
in other writings and talks and which other writers and
speakers have likewise been giving to receptive people. It is
astonishing how people can become inoculated with
happiness through an inner experience of spiritual change.
People of all types everywhere are having this experience
today. In fact, it has become one of the most popular
phenomena of our times, and, if it continues to develop and
expand, the person who has not had a spiritual experience
will soon be considered old-fashioned and behind the times.
Nowadays it is smart to be spiritually alive. It is old-fogyism
85
to be ignorant of that happiness-producing transformation
which people everywhere are enjoying at this time.
Recently, after finishing a lecture in a certain city, a big,
strapping, fine-looking man came up to me. He slapped me
on the shoulder with such force that it almost bowled me
over.
"Doctor," he said in a booming voice, "how about coming
out with the gang? We are having a big party at the Smiths'
house, and we would like you to come along. It's going to be
a whale of a shindig and you ought to get in on it." So ran his
racy invitation.
Well, obviously this didn't sound like a proper party for a
preacher, and I was hesitant. I was afraid I might cramp
everyone's style, so I began to make excuses.
"Oh, forget it," my friend told me. "Don't worry, this is your
kind of party. You will be surprised. Come on along. You
will get the kick of your life out of it."
So I yielded and went along with my buoyant and racy friend
and he was certainly one of the most infectious personalities
I had encountered in quite a while. Soon we came to a big
house set back among trees with a wide, sweeping driveway
up to the front door. From the noise issuing from the open
windows there was no question but that quite a party was in
progress, and I wondered what I was getting myself into. My
host, with a great shout, dragged me into the room, and we
had quite a handshaking time, and he introduced me to a
large group of gay and exuberant people. They were a happy,
joyous lot of folk.
I looked around for a bar, but there wasn't any. All that was
being served was coffee, fruit juice, ginger ale, sandwiches,
and ice cream, but there was lots of those.
86
"These people must have stopped somewhere before coming
here," I remarked to my friend.
He was shocked, and said, "Stopped somewhere? Why, you
don't understand. These people have got the spirit all right,
but not the kind of 'spirit' you are thinking about. I am
surprised at you," he said. "Don't you realize what makes this
crowd so happy? They have been renewed spiritually. They
have got something. They have been set free from
themselves. They have found God as a living, vital, honestto-goodness reality. Yes," he said, "they have got spirit all
right, but it isn't the kind that you get out of a bottle. They
have got spirit in their hearts."
Then I saw what he meant. This wasn't a crowd of sad-faced,
stodgy people. They were the leaders of that town—
businessmen, lawyers, doctors, teachers, society people, and
a lot of simpler folk besides, and they were having a
wonderful time at this party— talking about God, and they
were doing it in the most natural manner imaginable. They
were telling one another about the changes that had occurred
in their lives through revitalized spiritual power.
Those who have the naive notion that you can't laugh and be
gay when you are religious should have been in on that party.
Well, I went away from that party with a Bible verse running
through my mind, "In him was life; and the life was the light
of men." (John 1:4). That was the light I saw on the faces of
those happy people. An inner light was reflected outwardly
on their faces, and it came from an effervescent spiritual
something that they had taken into themselves. Life means
vitality, and these people obviously were getting their vitality
from God. They had found the power that creates happiness.
This is no isolated incident. I venture the assertion that in
your own community, if you will look around for them, you
will find lots of people just like those described above. If you
87
don't find them in your own home town, come to the Marble
Collegiate Church in New York City and you will find them
by the score. But you can get the same spirit by reading this
book if you practice the simple principles set forth.
As you read this book believe what you read, because it is
true; then start working on the practical suggestions the book
contains and you, too, will have the spiritual experience that
produces this quality of happiness. I know this is so, because
many of those to whom I have referred and shall refer in later
chapters got their vital new life in the same way. Then,
having been changed inwardly, you will begin to create out
of yourself not unhappiness, but a happiness of such quality
and character that you will wonder if you are living in the
same world. As a matter of fact it won't be the same world
because you are not the same, and what you are determines
the world in which you live, so as you change, your world
changes also.
If happiness is determined by our thoughts it is necessary to
drive off the thoughts which make for depression and
discouragement. This can be done first by simply
determining to do it; second, by utilizing an easily employed
technique which I suggested to a businessman. I met him at a
luncheon and have seldom heard such gloom as he got off.
His conversation would have been ultra-depressing had I
permitted it to affect me. It reeked with pessimism. To hear
him talk you would think everything was headed for ruin. Of
course the man was tired. Accumulated problems had
swamped his mind which was seeking release in retreat from
a world which was too much for his depleted energy. His
principal trouble was in his depressed thought pattern. He
needed an infusion of light and faith.
So rather boldly I said, "If you want to feel better and stop
being miserable, I can give you something that will fix you
up."
88
"What can you do?" he snorted. "Are you a miracle worker?"
"No," I replied, "but I can put you in touch with a miracle
worker who will drain off that unhappiness of yours and give
you a new slant on life. I mean that," I concluded, as we
separated.
Apparently he became curious, for he got in touch with me
later and I gave him a little book of mine called Thought
Conditioner. It contains forty health and happiness producing
thoughts. Inasmuch as it is a pocket-sized booklet, I
suggested that he carry it for easy consultation and that he
drop one of the suggested thoughts in his mind every day for
forty days. I further suggested that he commit each thought
to memory, thus allowing it to dissolve in consciousness, and
that he visualize this healthy thought sending a quieting and
healing influence through his mind. I assured him that if he
would follow this plan, these healthy thoughts would drive
off the diseased thoughts that were sapping his joy, energy,
and creative ability.
The idea at first impressed him as being a bit queer and he
had his doubts, but he followed directions. After about three
weeks he called me on the telephone and shouted, "Boy, this
sure works! It is wonderful. I have snapped out of it, and I
wouldn't have believed it possible."
He remains "snapped out of it" and is a genuinely happy
person. This pleasant condition resulted because he became
skilled in the power to create his own happiness. He later
commented that his first mental hurdle was honestly to face
the fact that while his unhappiness made him miserable, yet
he was at home in self-pity and self-punishment thoughts. He
knew that these sick thoughts were the cause of his trouble,
but he shrank from the effort required to desire change
sufficiently to actually go about changing. But when he
began systematically to insert healthy spiritual thoughts into
his mind as directed, he began first to want new life, then to
89
realize the thrilling fact that he could have it, then the even
more amazing fact that he was getting it. The result was that
after some three weeks of a self-improvement process new
happiness "burst" upon him.
Everywhere in this country today are groups of people who
have found the happy way. If we can have even one such
group in every city, town, and hamlet in America, we can
change the life of this country within a very short time. And
what kind of group do we mean? Let me explain.
I was speaking in a Western city and returned to my hotel
room rather late. I wanted to get a little sleep, for I was to be
up at five-thirty next morning to catch a plane. As I was
preparing for bed, the telephone rang, and a lady said, "There
are about fifty of us at my house waiting for you."
I explained that I could not come due to the early hour of my
departure in the morning.
"Oh," she said, "two men are on their way to get you. We
have been praying for you, and we want you to come and
pray with us before you leave the city."
I am glad I went, though I had very little sleep that night.
The men who came for me were a couple of alcoholics who
had been healed by the power of faith. They were two of the
happiest, most lovable fellows you can imagine.
The home to which they took me was packed. People were
sitting on the stairways, on the tables, on the floor. One man
was even perched on the grand piano. And what were they
doing? They were having a prayer meeting. They told me
that sixty such prayer groups were going on in that city all
the time.
I was never in such a meeting. They were anything but a
90
stuffy group. They were a released, happy crowd of real
people. I found myself strangely moved. The spirit in that
room was tremendous in its lifting force. The group would
burst into song, and I never heard such singing. The room
was filled with a wonderful spirit of laughter.
Then a woman stood up. I saw that she had braces on her
legs, and she said, "They told me I would never walk again.
Do you want to see me walk?" And she walked up and down
the room.
"What did it?" I asked.
"Jesus," she replied simply.
Then another fine-looking girl said, "Did you ever see a
victim of the narcotics habit? Well, I was one and I was
healed." There she sat, a beautiful, modest, charming young
woman and she, too, said, "Jesus did it."
Then a couple who had drifted apart told me that they had
been brought together and they were happier than ever
before.
"How did it come about?" I asked. And their reply was,
"Jesus did it."
A man said he had been a victim of alcohol, that he had
dragged his family down until they were living in abject
poverty and he was a complete failure. And now as he stood
before me he was a strong, healthy personality. I started to
ask how, but he nodded and said, "Jesus did it."
Then they burst into another song, and then someone
dimmed the lights and we all held hands around in a great
circle. I had a feeling as though I had hold of an electric
wire. Power was flowing around that room. Without any
question I was the least spiritually developed person in that
91
group. I knew in that moment that Jesus Christ was right
there in that house and those people had found Him. They
had been touched by His power. He had given them new life.
This life bubbled up in an irrepressible effervescence.
This is the secret of happiness. All else is secondary. Get this
experience and you've got real, unalloyed happiness, the best
the world offers. Don't miss it whatever you do in this life,
for this is it.

92
Chapter 6
Stop Fuming and Fretting
MANY PEOPLE MAKE life unnecessarily difficult for
themselves by dissipating power and energy through fuming
and fretting.
Do you ever "fume" and "fret"? Here is a picture of yourself
if you do. The word "fume" means to boil up, to blow off, to
emit vapor, to be agitated, to be distraught, to seethe. The
word "fret" is equally descriptive. It is reminiscent of a sick
child in the night, a petulant half-cry, half-whine. It ceases,
only to begin again. It has an irritating, annoying, penetrating
quality. To fret is a childish term, but it describes the
emotional reaction of many adults.
The Bible advises us to "Fret not thyself..." (Psalm 37: 1)
This is sound advice for the people of our time. We need to
stop fuming and fretting and get peaceful if we are to have
power to live effectively. And how do we go about doing so?
A first step is to reduce your pace or at least the tempo of
your pace. We do not realize how accelerated the rate of our
lives has become, or the speed at which we are driving
ourselves. Many people are destroying their physical bodies
by this pace, but what is even more tragic, they are tearing
their minds and souls to shreds as well. It is possible for a
person to live a quiet existence physically and yet maintain a
high tempo emotionally. Even an invalid can live at too high
a pace from that standpoint. The character of our thoughts
determines pace. When the mind goes rushing on pell-mell
from one feverish attitude to another it becomes feverish and
the result is a state bordering on petulance.
The pace of modern life must be reduced if we are not to
suffer profoundly from its debilitating over-stimulation and
93
super-excitement. This over-stimulation produces toxic
poisons in the body and creates emotional illness. It produces
fatigue and a sense of frustration so that we fume and fret
about everything from our personal troubles to the state of
the nation and the world. If the effect of this emotional
disquiet is so pronounced physically, what must its effect be
on that deep inner essence of the personality known as the
soul?
It is impossible to have peace of soul if the pace is so
feverishly accelerated. God won't go that fast. He will not
endeavor to keep up with you. He says in effect, "Go ahead if
you must with this foolish pace and when you are worn out I
will offer my healing. But I can make your life so rich if you
will slow down now and live and move and have your being
in me." God moves imperturbably, slowly, and with perfect
organization. The only wise rate at which to live is God's
rate. God gets things done and they are done right and He
does them without hurry. He neither fumes nor frets. He is
peaceful and therefore efficient. This same peace is offered
to us —"Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you..." (John 14:27)
In a sense this is a pathetic generation, especially in the great
cities because of the effect of nervous tension, synthetic
excitement, and noise; but the malady extends into the
country districts also, for the air waves transmit tension.
I was amused by an old lady who, in talking about this
matter, said, "Life is so daily." That remark certainly spoke
volumes about the pressure, responsibilities, and tension of
daily life. Its persistent, insistent demand upon us is
provocative of pressure.
One wonders whether this generation of Americans is not so
accustomed to tension that many are in the unhappy state of
not being comfortable without it. The deep quietness of
woods and valleys so well known to our forefathers is an
94
unaccustomed state to them. The tempo of their lives is such
that in many instances they have an incapacity to draw upon
the sources of peace and quietness which the physical world
offers.
One summer afternoon my wife and I went for a long walk in
the woods. We were stopping at the beautiful Lake Mohonk
Mountain House which is set in one of the finest natural
parks in America, 7,500 acres of virgin mountainside in the
middle of which is a lake lying like a gem in the forest. The
word mohonk means "lake in the sky." Aeons ago some giant
upheaval of the earth cast up these sheer cliffs. You come out
of the deep woods onto some noble promontory and rest your
eyes on great valleys set among hills, rock-ribbed and
ancient as the sun. These woods, mountains, and valleys
constitute what ought to be a sure retreat from every
confusion of this world.
On this afternoon as we walked there was a mixture of
summer showers and sunlit hours. We were drenched and
started to fret about it a bit because it took the press out of
our clothes. Then we told each other that it doesn't hurt a
human being to get drenched with clean rain water, that the
rain feels cool and fresh on one's face, and that you can
always sit in the sun and dry yourself out. We walked under
the trees and talked and then fell silent.
We were listening, listening deeply to the quietness. In a
strict sense, the woods are never still. There is tremendous
activity always in process, but nature makes no strident
noises regardless of the vastness of its operation. Nature's
sounds are quiet, harmonious.
On this beautiful afternoon, nature was laying its hand of
healing quietness upon us, and we could actually feel the
tension being drawn off.
Just as we were falling under this spell, the faint sounds of
95
what passes for music came to us. It was nervous, highstrung music of the jitterbug variety. Presently through the
woods came three young people, two young women and a
young man, and the latter was lugging a portable radio.
They were three young city people out for a walk in the
woods and tragically enough were bringing their noise along
with them. They were nice young folk, too, for they stopped
and we had a pleasant talk with them. It occurred to me to
ask them to turn that thing off and listen to the music of the
woods, but I didn't feel it was my business to instruct them,
and finally they went on their way.
We commented on the loss they were incurring, that they
could pass through this peacefulness and not give ear to the
music that is as old as the world, harmony and melody the
like of which man has never equaled: the song of the wind
through the trees, the sweet notes of birds singing their hearts
out, the whole background of the music of the spheres.
This is still to be found in America in our woods and great
plains, in our valleys, in our mountain majesties, and where
the ocean foams on soft shores of sand. We should avail
ourselves of its healing. Remember the words of Jesus,
"Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest
awhile." (Mark 6:31) Even as I write these words and give
you this good advice, I recall instances where it has been
necessary to remind myself to practice the same truth, which
emphasizes that we must everlastingly discipline ourselves to
quietness if we expect its benefits in our lives.
One autumn day Mrs. Peak and I took a trip into
Massachusetts to see our son John at Deerfield Academy.
We told him we would arrive at 11 A.M., and we pride
ourselves on the good old American custom of promptness.
Therefore, being a bit behind schedule, we were driving at
breakneck speed through the autumnal landscape. My wife
said, "Norman, did you see that radiant hillside?"
96
"What hillside?" I asked.
"It just went by on the other side," she explained. "Look at
that beautiful tree."
"What tree?" I was already a mile past it.
"This is one of the most glorious days I have ever seen," my
wife said. "How could you possibly imagine such amazing
colors as these New England hillsides in October? In fact,"
she said, "it makes me happy inside."
That remark of hers so impressed me that I stopped the car
and went back a quarter of a mile to a lake backed by
towering hills dressed in autumn colors. We sat and looked
and meditated. God with His genius and skill had painted
that scene in the varied colors which He alone can mix. In
the still waters of the lake lay a reflected vision of His glory,
for the hillside was unforgettably pictured in that mirrorlike
pond.
For quite a while we sat without a word until finally my wife
broke the silence by the only appropriate statement that one
could make, "He leadeth me beside the still waters." (Psalm
23:2) We arrived at Deerfield at eleven, but we were not
tired. In fact, we were deeply refreshed.
To help reduce this tension which seems to dominate our
people everywhere, you can start by reducing your own pace.
To do that you will need to slow down, quiet down. Do not
fume. Do not fret. Practice being peaceful. Practice "the
peace of God which passeth all understanding." (Philippians
4:7) Then note the quiet power sense that wells up within
you.
A friend of mine who was compelled to take an enforced rest
as a result of "pressure" wrote me, "Many lessons have been
learned during this enforced retreat. Now I know better than
97
before that in the quiet we become aware of His presence.
Life can get muddled. But 'muddied water,' says Lao-tse, 'let
stand, will become clear.' "
A physician gave some rather whimsical advice to a patient,
an aggressive, go-getter type of businessman. Excitedly he
told the doctor what an enormous amount of work he had to
do and that he had to get it done right away quick or else.
"I take my brief case home every night and it's packed with
work," he said with nervous inflection.
"Why do you take work home with you at night?" the doctor
asked quietly.
"I have to get it done," he fumed.
"Cannot someone else do it, or help you with it?" asked the
doctor.
"No," the man snapped. "I am the only one who can do it. It
must be done just right, and I alone can do it as it must be
done, and it has to be done quickly. Everything depends
upon me."
"If I write you a prescription, will you follow it?" asked the
doctor.
This, believe it or not, was the prescription. His patient was
to take off two hours every working day and go for a long
walk. Then he was to take off a half-day a week and spend
that half-day in a cemetery.
In astonishment the patient demanded, "Why should I spend
a half-day in a cemetery?"
"Because," answered the doctor, "I want you to wander
around and look at the gravestones of men who are there
permanently. I want you to meditate on the fact that many of
98
them are there because they thought even as you do, that the
whole world rested on their shoulders. Meditate on the
solemn fact that when you get there permanently the world
will go on just the same and, as important as you are, others
will be able to do the work you are now doing. I suggest that
you sit on one of those tombstones and repeat this statement,
'...a thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday when it
is past, and as a watch in the night.'" (Psalm 90:4)
The patient got the idea. He slowed his pace. He learned to
delegate authority. He achieved a proper sense of his own
importance. He stopped fuming and fretting. He got
peaceful. And, it might be added, he does better work. He is
developing a more competent organization and he admits
that his business is in better condition.
A prominent manufacturer was afflicted with tension, in fact,
he was in a very high-strung frame of mind. As he himself
described it, "he leapt out of bed every morning and
immediately got himself into high gear. He was in such a
rush and dither that he 'made his breakfast on soft-boiled
eggs because they slid down fast.'" This hectic pace left him
fagged and worn at about midday. He sank into bed every
night exhausted.
It so happens that his home is situated in a grove of trees.
Very early one morning, unable to sleep, he arose and sat by
the window. He became interested in watching a bird emerge
from his night's sleep. He noticed that a bird sleeps with his
head under his wing, the feathers pulled all around himself.
When he awakened, he pulled his bill out from under his
feathers, took a sleepy look around, stretched one leg to its
full length, meanwhile stretching the wing over the leg until
it spread out like a fan. He pulled the leg and wing back and
then repeated the same process with the other leg and wing,
whereupon he put his head down in his feathers again for a
delicious little cat nap (only in this case a bird nap), then the
99
head came out again. This time the bird looked around
eagerly, threw his head back, gave his wings and legs two
more big stretches, then he sent up a song, a thrilling,
melodic song of praise to the day, wherewith he hopped
down off the limb, got himself a drink of cold water, and
started looking for food.
My high-strung friend said to himself, "If that's the way the
birds get up, sort of slow and easy like, why wouldn't it be a
good method for me to start the day that way?" He actually
went through the same performance, even to singing, and
noticed that the song was an especially beneficial factor, that
it was a releasing mechanism.
"I can't sing," he chuckled, "but I practiced sitting quietly in
a chair and singing. Mostly I sang hymns and happy songs.
Imagine, me singing, but I did. My wife thought I was bereft
of my senses. The only thing I had on the bird was that I did
a little praying, too, then, like the bird, I felt like some food,
and I wanted a good breakfast—bacon and eggs. And I took
my time eating it. After that I went to work in a released
frame of mind. It surely did start me off for the day minus
the tension, and it helped me go through the day in a
peaceful and relaxed manner."
A former member of a championship university crew told me
that their shrewd crew coach often reminded them, "To win
this or any race, row slowly." He pointed out that rapid
rowing tends to break the stroke and when the stroke is
broken it is with the greatest difficulty that a crew recovers
the rhythm necessary to win. Meanwhile other crews pass the
disorganized group. It is indeed wise advise—"To go fast,
row slowly."
In order to row slowly or to work slowly and maintain the
steady pace that wins, the victim of high tempo will do well
to get the co-ordinating peace of God into his mind, his soul,
and, it might be added, into his nerves and muscles also.
100
Have you ever considered the importance of having the
peace of God in your muscles, in your joints? Perhaps your
joints will not pain so much when they have the peace of
God in them. Your muscles will work with correlation when
the peace of God who created them governs their action.
Speak to your muscles every day and to your joints and to
your nerves, saying, "Fret not thyself." (Psalm 37: 1) Relax
on a couch or bed, think of each important muscle from head
to feet, and say to each, "The peace of God is touching you."
Then practice "feeling" that peace throughout your entire
body. In due course your muscles and joints will take heed.
Slow down, for whatever you really want will be there when
you get there if you work toward it without stress, without
pressing. If, proceeding under God's guidance and in His
smooth and unhurried tempo, it is not there, then it was not
supposed to be there. If you miss it, perhaps you should have
missed it. So definitely seek to develop a normal, natural,
God-ordered pace. Practice and preserve mental quiet. Learn
the art of letting go all nervous excitement. To do this, stop
at intervals and affirm, "I now relinquish nervous
excitement—it is flowing from me. I am at peace." Do not
fume. Do not fret. Practice being peaceful.
To attain this efficient state of living, I recommend the
practice of thinking peaceful thoughts. Every day we
perform a series of acts designed to care for the body
properly. We bathe, brush the teeth, take exercise. In similar
fashion we should give time and planned effort to keeping
the mind in a healthy state. One way to do this is to sit
quietly and pass a series of peaceful thoughts through the
mind. For example, pass through the thoughts the memory of
a lofty mountain, a misty valley, a sun-speckled trout stream,
silver moonlight on water.
At least once in every twenty-four hours, preferably in the
busiest part of the day, deliberately stop whatever you are
101
doing for ten or fifteen minutes and practice serenity.
There are times when it is essential resolutely to check our
headlong pace, and it must be emphasized that the only way
to stop is to stop.
I went to a certain city on a lecture date and was met at the
train by a committee. I was rushed to a bookstore where I
had an autographing party and then to another bookstore
where another autographing party was held. Then they
rushed me to a luncheon. After rushing through the luncheon
I was rushed to a meeting. After the meeting I was rushed
back to the hotel where I changed my clothes and was rushed
to a reception where I met several hundred people and drank
three glasses of fruit punch. Then I was rushed back to the
hotel and told I had twenty minutes to dress for dinner. When
I was getting dressed the telephone rang and somebody said,
"Hurry, hurry, we must rush down to dinner."
Excitedly I chattered, "I will rush right down."
I rushed from the room and was so excited that I could
scarcely get the key into the lock. Hastily I felt myself, to be
sure that I was completely dressed, and rushed toward the
elevator. All of a sudden I stopped. I was out of breath. I
asked myself, "What is this all about? What is the meaning
of this ceaseless rush? This is ridiculous!"
Then I declared independence, and said, "I do not care if I go
to dinner. I do not care whether I make a talk. I do not have
to go to this dinner and I do not have to make a speech." So
deliberately and slowly I walked back to my room and took
my time about unlocking the door. I telephoned the man
downstairs and said, "If you want to eat, go ahead. If you
want to save a place for me, I will be down after a while, but
I am not going to rush any more."
So I removed my coat, sat down, took off my shoes, put my
102
feet up on the table, and just sat. Then I opened the Bible and
very slowly read aloud the 121st Psalm, "I will lift up mine
eyes unto the hills from whence cometh my help." I closed
the book and had a little talk with myself, saying, "Come on
now, start living a slower and more relaxed life," and then I
affirmed, "God is here and His peace is touching me.
"I do not need anything to eat," I reasoned. "I eat too much
anyway. Besides, the dinner will probably not be very good,
and if I am quiet now I will give a better speech at eight
o'clock."
So I sat there resting and praying for fifteen minutes. I shall
never forget the sense of peace and personal mastery I had
when I walked out of that room. I had the glorious feeling of
having overcome something, of having taken control of
myself emotionally, and when I reached the dining room the
others had just finished the first course. All I missed was the
soup, which by general consent was no great loss.
This incident was an amazing experience of the healing
presence of God. I gained these values by simply stopping,
by quietly reading the Bible, by sincerely praying, and by
thinking some peaceful thoughts for a few moments.
Physicians generally seem to feel that much physical trouble
could be avoided or overcome by practicing the philosophy
and methodology of not fuming or fretting.
A prominent citizen of New York told me that his doctor
suggested that he come to our clinic at the church "because,"
said his physician, "you need to develop a calm philosophy
of living. Your power resources are played out."
"My doctor says I am pushing myself to the limit. He tells
me I'm too tense, too high-strung, that I fume and fret too
much, and," he concluded, "my doctor declares the only sure
cure is for to develop what he calls a calm philosophy of
103
living."
My visitor arose and paced the floor, then demanded, "But
how in the world can I do that? It's a lot easier said than
done."
Then this excited gentleman went on to say that his doctor
had given him certain suggestions for developing this calm
philosophy of living. The suggestions as outlined were
indeed wise. "But then," he explained, "the doctor suggested
that I see you people here at the church, for he feels that if I
learn to use religious faith in a practical manner it will give
me peace of mind and bring down my blood pressure. Then I
will feel better physically. While I realize the doctor's
prescription is sensible," he complained, "how can a man
fifty years old, of a high-strung nature such as mine,
suddenly change the habits of a lifetime and develop this socalled calm philosophy of living?"
That did indeed seem to be a problem, for he was a bundle of
excitable and explosive nerves. He paced the floor, he
thumped the table, his voice was high-pitched, He gave the
impression of a thoroughly disturbed and baffled man.
Obviously he was showing up at his worst, but he was
clearly revealing the inner state of his personality, and the
insight thus gained gave us a chance to help him through
understanding him better.
As I listened to his words and observed his attitude, I again
understood why Jesus Christ retains his remarkable hold on
men. It is because He has the answer to such problems as
this, and I proved that fact by suddenly changing the line of
the conversation. Without any introductory words I began to
recite certain Bible texts such as, "Come unto me, all ye that
labor and the heavy laden, and I will give you
rest." (Matthew 11:28) And again, "Peace I leave with you,
my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I
unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
104
afraid." (John 14:27) And still again, "Thou wilt keep him in
perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee." (Isaiah 26:3)
I recited these words slowly, deliberately, reflectively. As
this reciting went on, I noticed that my visitor stopped being
agitated. Quietness came over him and then we both sat in
silence. It seemed that we sat so for several minutes. Perhaps
it wasn't that long, but finally he took a deep breath.
"Why, that's funny," he said. "I feel a lot better. Isn't that
queer? I guess it was those words that did it."
"No, not the words alone," I answered, "though they do have
a remarkable effect upon the mind, but something deeper
happened just then. He touched you a minute ago—the
Physician with the healing touch. He was present in this
room."
My visitor evidenced no surprise at this assertion, but eagerly
and impetuously agreed—and conviction was written on his
face. "That's right, He sure was. I felt Him. I see what you
mean. Now I understand—Jesus Christ will help me develop
a calm philosophy of living."
This man found what increasing thousands are presently
discovering, that a simple faith in and practice of the
principles and techniques of Christianity bring peace and
quietness and therefore new power to body, mind, and spirit.
It is the perfect antidote to fuming and to fretting. It helps a
person to become peaceful and thus to tap new resources of
strength.
Of course it was necessary to teach this man a new pattern of
thinking and acting. This was done in part by suggesting
literature written by experts in the field of spiritual culture.
For example, we gave him lessons in the skill of church
going. We showed him how to make church worship a
therapy. He was instructed in the scientific use of prayer and
105
relaxation. And as a result of this practice eventually he
became a healthy man. Anyone willing to follow this
program and sincerely put these principles into day-by-day
practice can, I believe, develop inner peace and power. Many
of these techniques are outlined in this book.
In attaining emotional control the daily practice of healing
techniques is of first importance. Emotional control cannot
be gained in any magical or easy way. You cannot develop it
by merely reading a book, although that is often helpful. The
only sure method is by working at it regularly, persistently,
scientifically, and by developing creative faith.
I suggest that you begin with such a primary procedure as
simply the practice of keeping physically still. Don't pace the
floor. Don't wring your hands. Don't pound or shout or argue
or walk up and down. Don't let yourself get worked up into a
dither. In excitement one's physical movements become
accentuated.
Therefore begin at the simplest place, that is by ceasing
physical movement. Stand still, sit down, lie down. Certainly
keep the voice down to a low pitch.
In developing a calm control it is necessary to think
calmness, for the body responds sensitively to the type of
thoughts that pass through the mind. It is also true that the
mind can be quieted by first making the body quiet. That is
to say, a physical attitude can induce desired mental
attitudes.
In a speech I related the following incident which occurred in
a committee meeting I attended. A gentleman who heard me
tell this story was greatly impressed by it and took its truth to
heart. He tried the technique suggested and reports that it has
been very effective in controlling his fuming and fretting.
I was in a meeting where a discussion was going on which
106
finally became rather bitter. Tempers were becoming frayed
and some of the participants were decidedly on edge. Sharp
remarks were passed. Suddenly one man arose, deliberately
took off his coat, opened his collar, and lay down upon a
couch. All were astonished, and someone asked if he felt ill.
"No," he said, "I feel fine, but I am beginning to get mad,
and I have learned that it is difficult to get mad lying down."
We all laughed, and the tension was broken. Then our
whimsical friend went on to explain that he had "tried a little
trick" with himself. He had a quick temper, and when he felt
himself getting mad he found that he was clenching his fist
and raising his voice, so he deliberately extended his fingers,
not allowing them to form into a fist. In proportion to the
rising of his tension or anger, he depressed his voice and
talked in exaggerated low tones. "You cannot carry on an
argument in a whisper," he said with a grin.
This principle can be effective in controlling emotional
excitements, fretting, and tension, as many have discovered
by experimentation. A beginning step, therefore, in achieving
calmness is to discipline your physical reactions. You will be
surprised at how quickly this can reduce the heat of your
emotions, and when emotional heat is driven off, fuming and
fretting subside. You will be amazed at the energy and power
you will save. You will be much less tired.
It is, moreover, a good procedure to practice being
phlegmatic or apathetic, even indifferent. To a certain extent
even practice being sluggish. People thus constituted are less
likely to emotional breaks. Highly organized individuals may
do well to cultivate these reactions to a degree at least.
Naturally one does not want to lose the keen, sensitive
responsiveness characteristic of the highly organized
individual. But the practice of being phlegmatic tends to
bring such a keyed-up personality to a balanced emotional
107
position.
Following is a technique consisting of six points which I
have personally found of great helpfulness in reducing the
tendency to fume and fret. I have suggested its use to
countless people who practice it and find it of great value:
1. Sit relaxed in a chair. Completely yield yourself to the
chair. Starting with your toes and proceeding to the top of
your head, conceive of every portion of the body as relaxing.
Affirm relaxation by saying, "My toes are relaxed—my
fingers—my facial muscles."
2. Think of your mind as the surface of a lake in a storm,
tossed by waves and in tumult. But now the waves subside,
and the surface of the lake is placid and unruffled.
3. Spend two or three minutes thinking of the most beautiful
and peaceful scenes you have ever beheld, as, for example, a
mountain at sunset, or a deep valley filled with the hush of
early morning, or a woods at noonday, or moonlight upon
rippling waters. In memory relive these scenes.
4. Repeat slowly, quietly, bringing out the melody in each, a
series of words which express quietness and peace, as, for
example, (a) tranquillity (say it very deliberately and in a
tranquil manner); (b) serenity; (c) quietness. Think of other
such words and repeat them.
5. Make a mental list of times in your life when you have
been conscious of God's watchful care and recall how, when
you were worried and anxious, He brought things out right
and took care of you. Then recite aloud this line from an old
hymn, "So long Thy power hath kept me, sure it STILL will
lead me on."
6. Repeat the following, which has an amazing power to
relax and quiet the mind: "Thou wilt keep him in perfect
108
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee." (Isaiah 26:3) Repeat
this several times during the day, whenever you have a
fraction of a moment. Repeat it aloud if possible, so that by
the end of the day you will have said it many times.
Conceive of these words as active, vital substances
permeating your mind, sending into every area of your
thinking a healing balm. This is the best-known medicine for
taking tension from the mind.
As you work with the techniques suggested in this chapter,
the tendency to fume and fret will gradually be modified. In
direct proportion to your progress the power heretofore
drawn off by this unhappy habit will be felt in your increased
ability to meet life's responsibilities.

109
Chapter 7
Expect the Best and Get It
"WHY DOES MY boy fail in every job he gets?" asked a
puzzled father about his thirty-year-old son.
It was indeed difficult to understand the failure of this young
man, for seemingly he had everything. Of good family, his
educational and business opportunities were beyond the
average. Nevertheless, he had a tragic flair for failure.
Everything he touched went wrong. He tried hard enough,
yet somehow he missed success. Presently he found an
answer, a curiously simple but potent answer. After
practicing this newfound secret for a while he lost the flair
for failure and acquired the touch of success. His personality
began to focus, his powers to fuse.
Not long ago at luncheon I could not help admiring this
dynamic man at the height of his power. "You amaze me," I
commented. "A few years ago you were failing at
everything. Now you have worked up an original idea into a
fine business. You are a leader in your community. Please
explain this remarkable change in you."
"Really it was quite simple," he replied. "I merely learned the
magic of believing. I discovered that if you expect the worst
you will get the worst, and if you expect the best you will get
the best. It all happened through actually practicing a verse
from the Bible."
"And what is that verse?"
"'If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that
believeth.' (Mark 9:23) I was brought up in a religious
home," he explained, "and heard that verse many times, but it
never had any effect upon me. One day in your church I
heard you emphasize those words in a talk. In a flash of
110
insight I realized that the key I had missed was that my mind
was not trained to believe, to think positively, to have faith in
either God or myself. I followed your suggestion of putting
myself in God's hands and practiced your outlined techniques
of faith. I trained myself to think positively about everything.
Along with that I try to live right." He smiled and said, "God
and I struck up a partnership. When I adopted that policy,
things began to change almost at once for me. I got into the
habit of expecting the best, not the worst, and that is the way
my affairs have turned out lately. I guess it's a kind of
miracle, isn't it?" he asked as he concluded his fascinating
story.
But it wasn't miraculous at all. Actually what had happened
was that he had learned to use one of the most powerful laws
in the world, a law recognized alike by psychology and
religion, namely, change your mental habits to belief instead
of disbelief. Learn to expect, not to doubt. In so doing you
bring everything into the realm of possibility.
This does not mean that by believing you are necessarily
going to get everything you want or think you want. Perhaps
that would not be good for you. When you put your trust in
God, He guides your mind so that you do not want things
that are not good for you or that are inharmonious with God's
will. But it does definitely mean that when you learn to
believe, then that which has seemingly been impossible
moves into the area of the possible. Every great thing at last
becomes for you a possibility.
William James, the famous psychologist, said, "Our belief at
the beginning of a doubtful undertaking is the one thing (now
get that—is the one thing) that insures the successful
outcome of your venture." To learn to believe is of primary
importance. It is the basic factor of succeeding in any
undertaking. When you expect the best, you release a
magnetic force in your mind which by a law of attraction
111
tends to bring the best to you. But if you expect the worst,
you release from your mind the power of repulsion which
tends to force the best from you. It is amazing how a
sustained expectation of the best sets in motion forces which
cause the best to materialize.
An interesting illustration of this fact was described some
years ago by Hugh Fullerton, a famous sports writer of a
bygone era. As a boy, Hugh Fullerton was my favorite writer
of sports stories. One story which I have never forgotten
concerned Josh O'Reilly, one-time manager of the San
Antonio Club of the Texas league. O'Reilly had a roster of
great players, seven of whom had been hitting over three
hundred, and everybody thought his team would easily take
the championship. But the club fell into a slump and lost
seventeen of the first twenty games. The players simply
couldn't hit anything, and each began to accuse the other of
being a "jinx" to the team.
Playing the Dallas Club, a rather poor team that year, only
one San Antonio player got a hit, and that, strangely enough,
was the pitcher. O'Reilly's team was badly beaten that day. In
the clubhouse after the game the players were a disconsolate
lot. Josh O'Reilly knew that he had an aggregation of stars
and he realized that their trouble was simply that they were
thinking wrong. They didn't expect to get a hit. They didn't
expect to win. They expected to be defeated. They were
thinking not victory but defeat. Their mental pattern was not
one of expectation but of doubt. This negative mental
process inhibited them, froze their muscles, threw them off
their timing, and there was no free flow of easy power
through the team.
It so happened that a preacher named Schlater was popular in
that neighborhood at that time. He claimed to be a faith
healer and apparently was getting some astounding results.
Throngs crowded to hear him and most everybody had
112
confidence in him. Perhaps the fact that they did believe in
his power enabled Schlater to achieve results.
O'Reilly asked each player to lend him his two best bats.
Then he asked the members of the team to stay in the
clubhouse until he returned. He put the bats in a
wheelbarrow and went off with them. He was gone for an
hour. He returned jubilantly to tell the players that Schlater,
the preacher, had blessed the bats and that these bats now
contained a power that could not be overcome. The players
were astounded and delighted.
The next day they overwhelmed Dallas, getting 37 base hits
and 20 runs. They hammered their way through the league to
a championship, and Hugh Fullerton said that for years in the
Southwest a player would pay a large sum for a "Schlater
bat."
Regardless of Schlater's personal power, the fact remains that
something tremendous happened in the minds of those
ballplayers. Their thought pattern was changed. They began
thinking in terms of expectation, not doubt. They expected
not the worst, but the best. They expected hits, runs,
victories, and they got them. They had the power to get what
they wanted. There was no difference in the bats themselves,
I am quite sure of that, but there was certainly a difference in
the minds of the men who used them. Now they knew they
could make hits. Now they knew they could get runs. Now
they knew they could win. A new thought pattern changed
the minds of those men so that the creative power of faith
could operate.
Perhaps you have not been doing so well in the game of life.
Perhaps you stand up to bat and cannot make a hit. You
strike out time and again and your batting average is
lamentably low. Let me give you a suggestion. I guarantee
that it will work. The basis for my assurance is the fact that
thousands of people have been trying it with very great
113
results. Things will be very different for you if you give this
method a real trial.
Start reading the New Testament and notice the number of
times it refers to faith. Select a dozen of the strongest
statements about faith, the ones that you like the best. Then
memorize each one. Let these faith concepts drop into your
conscious mind. Say them over and over again, especially
just before going to sleep at night. By a process of spiritual
osmosis they will sink from your conscious into your
subconscious mind and in time will modify and reslant your
basic thought pattern. This process will change you into a
believer, into an expecter, and when you become such, you
will in due course become an achiever. You will have new
power to get what God and you decide you really want from
life.
The most powerful force in human nature is the spiritualpower technique taught in the Bible. Very astutely the Bible
emphasizes the method by which a person can make
something of himself. Faith, belief, positive thinking, faith in
God, faith in other people, faith in yourself, faith in life. This
is the essence of the technique that teaches. "If thou canst
believe," it says, "all things are possible to him that
believeth." (Mark 9:23) "If ye have faith... nothing shall be
impossible unto you." (Matthew 17:20) "According to your
faith be it unto you." (Matthew 9:29) Believe—believe—so
it drives home the truth that faith moves mountains.
Some skeptical person who has never learned this powerful
law of the effect of right thinking may doubt my assertions
regarding the amazing results which happen when this
technique is employed.
Things become better when you expect the best instead of
the worst, for the reason that being freed from self-doubt,
you can put your whole self into your endeavor, and nothing
can stand in the way of the man who focuses his entire self
114
on a problem. When you approach a difficulty as a personal
unity, the difficulty, which itself is a demonstration of
disunity, tends to deteriorate.
When the entire concentration of all your force—physical,
emotional, and spiritual—is brought to bear, the
consolidation of these powers properly employed is quite
irresistible.
Expecting the best means that you put your whole heart (i.e.,
the central essence of your personality) into what you want
to accomplish. People are defeated in life not because of lack
of ability, but for lack of wholeheartedness. They do not
wholeheartedly expect to succeed. Their heart isn't in it,
which is to say they themselves are not fully given. Results
do not yield themselves to the person who refuses to give
himself to the desired results.
A major key to success in this life, to attaining that which
you deeply desire, is to be completely released and throw all
there is of yourself into your job or any project in which you
are engaged. In other words, whatever you are doing, give it
all you've got. Give every bit of yourself. Hold nothing back.
Life cannot deny itself to the person who gives life his all.
But most people, unfortunately, don't do that. In fact, very
few people do, and this is a tragic cause of failure, or, if not
failure, it is the reason we only half attain.
A famous Canadian athletic coach, Ace Percival, says that
most people, athletes as well as non-athletes, are "holdouts,"
that is to say, they are always keeping something in reserve.
They do not invest themselves 100 percent in competition.
Because of that fact they never achieve the highest of which
they are capable.
Red Barber, famous baseball announcer, told me that he had
known few athletes who completely give themselves.
115
Don't be a "holdout." Go all out. Do this, and life will not
hold out on you.
A famous trapeze artist was instructing his students how to
perform on the high trapeze bar. Finally, having given full
explanations and instruction in this skill, he told them to
demonstrate their ability.
One student, looking up at the insecure perch upon which he
must perform, was suddenly filled with fear. He froze
completely. He had a terrifying vision of himself falling to
the ground. He couldn't move a muscle, so deep was his
fright. "I can't do it! I can't do it!" he gasped.
The instructor put his arm around the boy's shoulder and
said, "Son, you can do it, and I will tell you how." Then he
made a statement which is of inestimable importance. It is
one of the wisest remarks I have ever heard. He said, "Throw
your heart over the bar and your body will follow."
Copy that one sentence. Write it on a card and put it in your
pocket. Place it under the glass on your desk top. Tack it up
on your wall. Stick it in your shaving mirror. Better still,
write it on your mind, you who really want to do something
with life. It's packed with power, that sentence. "Throw your
heart over the bar and your body will follow."
Heart is the symbol of creative activity. Fire the heart with
where you want to go and what you want to be. Get it so
deeply fixed in your unconscious that you will not take no
for an answer, then your entire personality will follow where
your heart leads. "Throw your heart over the bar" means to
throw your faith over your difficulty, throw your affirmation
over every barrier, throw your visualization over your
obstacles. In other words, throw the spiritual essence of you
over the bar and your material self will follow in the victory
groove thus pioneered by your faith-inspired mind. Expect
the best, not the worst, and you will attain your heart's desire.
116
It is what is in the heart of you, either good or bad, strong or
weak, that finally comes to you. Emerson said, "Beware of
what you want for you will get it."
That this philosophy is of practical value is illustrated by the
experience of a young woman whom I interviewed a number
of years ago. She made an appointment to see me in my
office at two o'clock on a certain afternoon. Being quite busy
that day, I had gotten a little behind schedule, and it was
about five minutes after two when I walked into the
conference room where she was waiting. It was obvious that
she was displeased for her lips were pressed firmly together.
"It's five minutes after two, and we had an appointment at 2
P. M.," she said. "I always admire promptness."
"So do I. I always believe in being prompt, and I hope you
will forgive me for my unavoidable delay," I said with a
smile.
But she was not in a smiling mood, for she said crisply, "I
have a very important problem to present to you and I want
an answer, and I expect an answer." Then she shot out at me:
"I might as well put it to you bluntly. I want to get married."
"Well," I replied, "that is a perfectly normal desire and I
should like to help you."
"I want to know why I can't get married," she continued.
"Every time I form a friendship with a man, the next thing I
know he fades out of the picture and another chance is gone
by, and," she added, speaking frankly, "I am not getting any
younger. You conduct a personal-problem clinic to study
people and you have had some experience, and I am putting
my problem right up to you. Tell me, why can't I get
married?"
I studied her to see if she was the kind of person to whom
117
one could speak frankly, for certain things had to be said if
she really meant business. Finally I decided that she was of
big enough caliber to take the medicine that would be
required if she was to correct her personality difficulties, so I
said, "Well, now, let's analyze the situation. Obviously you
have a good mind and a fine personality, and, if I may say so,
you are a very handsome lady."
All of these things were true. I congratulated her in every
way that I honestly could, but then I said, "I think that I see
your difficulty and it is this. You took me to task because I
was five minutes late for our appointment. You were really
quite severe with me. Has it ever occurred to you that your
attitude represents a pretty serious fault? I think a husband
would have a very difficult time if you checked him up that
closely all the time. In fact, you would so dominate him that,
even if you did marry, your marital life would be
unsatisfactory. Love cannot live under domination."
Then I said, "You have a very firm way of pressing your lips
together which indicates a domineering attitude. The average
male, I might as well tell you, does not like to be dominated,
at least so that he knows it." Then I added, "I think you
would be a very attractive person if you got those too-firm
lines out of your face. You must have a little softness, a little
tenderness, and those lines are too firm to be soft." Then I
observed her dress, which was obviously quite expensive,
but she didn't wear it very well, and so I said, "This may be a
bit out of my line, and I hope you won't mind, but perhaps
you could get that dress to hang a little better." I know my
description was awkward, but she was a good sport about it
and laughed right out loud.
She said, "You certainly don't use style phraseology, but I
get the idea."
Then I suggested, "Perhaps it might help to get your hair
fixed up a little. It's a little—floaty. Then you might also add
118
a little sweet-smelling perfume—just a whiff of it. But the
really important thing is to get a new attitude that will
change the lines on your face and give you that indefinable
quality known as spiritual joy. This I am certain will release
charm and loveliness in you."
"Well," she burst out, "never did I expect to get this
combination of advice in a minister's office."
"No," I chuckled, "I suppose not, but nowadays we have to
cover the whole field in a human problem."
Then I told her about an old professor of mine at Ohio
Wesleyan University, "Roily" Walker, who said, "God runs a
beauty parlor." He explained that some girls when they came
to college were very pretty, but when they came back to visit
the campus thirty years later their beauty had faded. The
moonlight-and-roses loveliness of their youth did not last.
On the other hand, other girls came to college who were very
plain, but when they returned thirty years later they were
beautiful women. "What made the difference?" he asked.
"The latter had the beauty of an inner spiritual life written on
their faces," and then he added, "God runs a beauty parlor."
Well, this young lady thought about what I told her for a few
minutes and then she said, "There's a lot of truth in what you
say. I'll try it."
Here is where her strong personality proved effective, for she
did try it.
A number of years went by and I had forgotten her. Then in a
certain city, after making a speech, a very lovely-looking
lady with a fine-looking man and a little boy about ten years
of age came up to me. The lady asked smilingly, "Well, how
do you think it hangs?"
"How do I think what hangs?" I asked, puzzled.
119
"My dress," she said. "Do you think it hangs right?"
Bewildered, I said, "Yes, I think it hangs all right, but just
why do you ask?"
"Don't you know me?" she asked.
"I see a great many people in my life," I said. "Frankly, no, I
don't think I have ever seen you before."
Then she reminded me of our talk of years ago which I have
described.
"Meet my husband and my little boy. What you told me was
absolutely true," she said very earnestly. "I was the most
frustrated, unhappy individual imaginable when I came to
see you, but I put into practice the principles you suggested. I
really did, and they worked."
Her husband then spoke up and said, "There was never a
sweeter person in the world than Mary here," and I must say
that she looked the part. She had evidently visited "God's
beauty parlor."
Not only did she experience a softening and mellowing of
her inner spirit, but she properly used a great quality which
she possessed, namely, the driving force to get what she
wanted. This led her to the point where she was willing to
change herself so that her dreams could be realized. She had
that quality of mind whereby she took herself in hand, she
applied the spiritual techniques, and she had a profound and
yet simple faith that what her heart told her she wanted could
be obtained by the proper creative and positive procedures.
So the formula is to know what you want, test it to see if it is
a right thing, change yourself in such a manner that it will
naturally come to you, and always have faith. With the
creative force of belief you stimulate that particular gathering
together of circumstances which brings your cherished wish
120
to pass.
Students of modern dynamic thought are realizing more and
more the practical value of the ideas and teachings of Jesus,
especially such truths as the dictum, "According to your
faith, be it unto you." (Matthew 9:29) According to your
faith in yourself, according to your faith in your job,
according to your faith in God, this far will you get and no
further. If you believe in your job and in yourself and in the
opportunities of your country, and if you believe in God and
will work hard and study and put yourself into it—in other
words, if you "throw your heart over the bar," you can swing
up to any high place to which you want to take your life and
your service and your achievement. Whenever you have a
bar, that is to say a barrier, in front of you, stop, close your
eyes, visualize everything that is above the bar and nothing
that is below it, then imaginatively throw "your heart" over
that bar and see yourself as being given lifting power to rise
above it. Believe that you are experiencing this upthrust of
force. You will be amazed at the lifting force you will
receive. If in the depth of your mind you visualize the best
and employ the powers of faith and energy, you will get the
best.
Naturally in this process of achieving the best it is important
to know where you want to go in life. You can reach your
goal, your best dreams can come true, you can get where you
want to go only if you know what your goal is. Your
expectation must have a clearly defined objective. Lots of
people get nowhere simply because they do not know where
they want to go. They have no clear-cut, precisely defined
purpose. You cannot expect the best if you think aimlessly.
A young man of twenty-six consulted me because he was
dissatisfied with his job. He was ambitious to fill a bigger
niche in life and wanted to know how to improve his
circumstances. His motive seemed unselfish and entirely
121
worthwhile.
"Well, where do you want to go?" I asked.
"I just don't know exactly," he said hesitantly. "I have never
given k any thought. I only know I want to go somewhere
other than where I am."
"What can you do best?" I then asked. "What are your strong
points?"
"I don't know," he responded. "I never thought that over
either."
"But what would you like to do if you had your choice?
What do you really want to do?" I insisted.
"I just can't say," he replied dully. "I don't really know what I
would like to do. I never thought it over. Guess I ought to
figure that one out too."
"Now, look here," I said, "you want to go somewhere from
where you are, but you don't know where you want to go.
You don't know what you can do or what you would like to
do. You will have to get your ideas organized before you can
expect to start getting anywhere."
That is the failure point with many people. They never get
anywhere because they have only a hazy idea where they
want to go, what they want to do. No objective leads to no
end.
We made a thorough analysis, testing this young man's
capabilities, and found some assets of personality he did not
know he possessed. But it was necessary to supply a
dynamic to move him forward, so we taught him the
techniques of practical faith. Today he is on the way to
achievement.
122
Now he knows where he wants to go and how to get there.
He knows what the best is and he expects to attain it and he
will— nothing can stop him.
I asked an outstanding newspaper editor, an inspiring
personality, "How did you get to be the editor of this
important paper?"
"I wanted to be," he replied simply.
"Is that all there is to it?" I asked. "You wanted to be and so
there you are."
"Well, that may not be all of it, but that was a large part of
the process," he explained. "I believe that if you want to get
somewhere, you must decide definitely where you want to be
or what you want to accomplish. Be sure it is a right
objective, then photograph this objective on your mind and
hold it there. Work hard, believe in it, and the thought will
become so powerful that it will tend to assure success. There
is a deep tendency," he declared, "to become what your mind
pictures, provided you hold the mental picture strongly
enough and if the objective is sound."
So saying, the editor pulled a well-worn card from his wallet
and said, "I repeat this quotation every day of my life. It has
become my dominating thought."
I copied it and am giving it to you: "A man who is selfreliant, positive, optimistic, and undertakes his work with the
assurance of success magnetizes his condition. He draws to
himself the creative powers of the universe."
It is indeed a fact that the person who thinks with positive
self-reliance and optimism does magnetize his condition and
releases power to attain his goal. So expect the best at all
times. Never think of the worst. Drop it out of your thought,
relegate it. Let there be no thought in your mind that the
123
worst will happen. Avoid entertaining the concept of the
worst, for whatever you take into your mind can grow there.
Therefore take the best into your mind and only that. Nurture
it, concentrate on it, emphasize it, visualize it, prayerize it,
surround it with faith. Make it your obsession. Expect the
best, and spiritually creative mind power aided by God
power will produce the best.
It may be that as you read this book you are down to what
you think is the worst and you may remark that no amount of
thinking will affect your situation. The answer to that
objection is that it simply isn't so. Even if you may be down
to the worst, the best is potentially within you. You have
only to find it, release it, and rise up with it. This requires
courage and character, to be sure, but the main requirement
is faith. Cultivate faith and you will have the necessary
courage and character.
A woman was compelled by adversity to go into sales work,
a type of activity for which she had no training. She
undertook to demonstrate vacuum cleaners from house to
house. She took a negative attitude toward herself and her
work. She "just didn't believe she could do this job." She
"knew" she was going to fail. She feared to approach a house
even though she came for a requested demonstration. She
believed that she could not make the sale. As a result, as is
not surprising, she failed in a high percentage of her
interviews.
One day she chanced to call upon a woman who evidenced
consideration beyond the average. To this customer the
saleswoman poured out her tale of defeat and powerlessness.
The other woman listened patiently, then said quietly, "If you
expect failure, you will get failure, but if you expect to
succeed, I am sure you will succeed." And she added, "I will
give you a formula which I believe will help you. It will
restyle your thinking, give you new confidence, and help you
124
to accomplish your goals. Repeat this formula before every
call. Believe in it and then marvel at what it will do for you.
This is it. 'If God be for us, who can be against us?' (Romans
8:31) But change it by personalizing it so that you say, 'If
God be for me, who can be against me?' If God be for me,
then I know that with God's help I can sell vacuum cleaners.
God realizes that you want security and support for your
little children and yourself, and by practicing the method I
suggest you will be given power to get what you want."
She learned to utilize this formula. She approached each
house expecting to make a sale, affirming and picturizing
positive, not negative, results. As the saleswoman employed
this principle she presently acquired new courage, new faith,
and deeper confidence in her own ability. Now she declares,
"God helps me sell vacuum cleaners," and who can dispute
it?
It is a well-defined and authentic principle that what the
mind profoundly expects it tends to receive. Perhaps this is
true because what you really expect is what you actually
want. Unless you really want something sufficiently to create
an atmosphere of positive factors by your dynamic desire, it
is likely to elude you. "If with all your heart"—that is the
secret. "If with all your heart," that is to say, if with the full
complement of your personality, you reach out creatively
toward your heart's desire, your reach will not be in vain.
Let me give you four words as a formulation of a great law—
faith power works wonders. Those four words are packed
with dynamic and creative force. Hold them in your
conscious mind. Let them sink into the unconscious and they
can help you to overcome any difficulty. Hold them in your
thoughts, say them over and over again. Say them until your
mind accepts them, until you believe them—faith power
works wonders.
I have no doubt about the effectiveness of this concept, for I
125
have seen it work so often that my enthusiasm for faith
power is absolutely boundless.
You can overcome any obstacle. You can achieve the most
tremendous things by faith power. And how do you develop
faith power? The answer is: to saturate your mind with the
great words of the Bible. If you will spend one hour a day
reading the Bible and committing its great passages to
memory, thus allowing them to recondition your personality,
the change in you and in your experience will be little short
of miraculous.
Just one section of the Bible will accomplish this for you.
The eleventh chapter of Mark is enough. You will find the
secret in the following words, and this is one of the greatest
formulas the Book contains: "Have faith in God (that's
positive, isn't it?) for verily I say unto you, that whosoever
shall say unto this mountain (that's specific) be thou removed
(that is, stand aside) and be thou cast into the sea (that means
out of sight—anything you threw into the sea is gone for
good. The Titanic lies at the bottom of the sea. And the sea
bottom is lined with ships. Cast your opposition called a
"mountain" into the sea) and shall not doubt in his heart
(Why does this statement use the word heart: Because it
means you are not to doubt in your subconscious, in the inner
essence of you. It isn't so superficial as a doubt in the
conscious mind. That is a normal, intelligent questioning. It's
a deep fundamental doubt that is to be avoided) but shall
believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass,
he shall have whatsoever he saith." (Mark 11:22-23)
This is not some theory that I have thought up. It is taught by
the most reliable book known to man. Generation after
generation, no matter what develops in the way of
knowledge and science, the Bible is read by more people
than any other book. Humanity rightly has more confidence
in it than any other document ever written, and the Bible tells
126
us that faith power works wonders.
The reason, however, that great things do not happen to some
people is that they are not specific in their application of
faith power. We are told, "Ye shall say to this mountain."
That is to say, do not address your efforts to the entire
mountain range of all your difficulties, but attack one thing
that may be defeating you at the moment. Be specific. Take
them one by one.
If there is something you want, how do you go about getting
it? In the first place, ask yourself, "Should I want it?" Test
that question very honestly in prayer to be sure you should
want it and whether you should have it. If you can answer
that question in the affirmative, then ask God for it and don't
be backward in asking Him. And if God, having more
insight, believes that you shouldn't have it, you needn't
worry—He won't give it to you. But if it is a right thing, ask
Him for it, and when you ask, do not doubt in your heart. Be
specific.
The validity of this law was impressed upon me by
something that a friend of mine, a Midwestern businessman,
told me. This man is a big, extrovertish, outgoing, lovable
gentleman, a truly great Christian. He teaches the largest
Bible class in his state. In the town where he lives he is Mr.
"Town" himself. He is head of a plant employing forty
thousand people.
His office desk is full of religious literature. He even has
some of my sermons and pamphlets there. In his plant, one
of the biggest in the United States, he manufactures
refrigerators.
He is one of those whole-souled, rugged individuals who has
the capacity to have faith. He believes that God is right there
in his office with him.
127
My friend said, "Preach a big faith—not any little old
watered down faith. Don't be afraid that faith isn't scientific
enough. I am a scientist," he said. "I use science in my
business every day, and I use the Bible every day. The Bible
will work. Everything in the Bible works if you believe in
it."
When he was made general manager of this plant it was
whispered around town, "Now that Mr. ——— is general
manager, we'll have to bring our Bibles to work with us."
After a few days he called into his office some of the men
who were making this remark. He uses language they
understand, and he said, "I hear you guys are going around
town saying that now I am general manager, you will have to
bring your Bibles to work with you."
"Oh, we didn't mean that," they said in embarrassment.
He said, "Well, you know, that's a ——— good idea, but I
don't want you to come lugging them under your arms. Bring
them here in your hearts and in your minds. If you come with
a spirit of good will and faith in your hearts and minds,
believe me, we'll do business.
"So," he said, "the kind of faith to have is the specific kind,
the kind that moves this particular mountain."
Suddenly he said to me, "Did you ever have a toe bother
you?" I was rather astonished by that, but before I could
answer he said, "I had a toe that bothered me and I took it to
the doctors here in town, and they are wonderful doctors, and
they said there wasn't anything wrong with the toe that they
could see. But they were wrong, because it hurt. So I went
out and got a book on anatomy and read up on toes. It is
really a simple construction. There's nothing but a few
muscles and ligaments and a bony structure. It seemed that
anybody who knows anything about a toe could fix it, but I
couldn't get anybody to fix that toe, and it hurt me all the
128
time. So I sat down one day and took a look at that toe. Then
I said, 'Lord, I'm sending this toe right back to the plant. You
made that toe. I make refrigerators and I know all there is to
know about a refrigerator. When we sell a refrigerator, we
guarantee the customer service. If his refrigerator doesn't
work right and if our service agents can't fix it, he brings it
back to the plant and we fix it, because we know how.' So I
said, 'Lord, you made this toe. You manufactured it, and your
service agents, the doctors, don't seem to know how to get it
working right, and if you don't mind, Lord, I would like to
have it fixed up as soon as possible, because it's bothering
me.' "
"How is the toe now?" I asked.
"Perfect," he replied.
Perhaps this is a foolish kind of story, and I laughed when he
told it, but I almost cried, too, for I saw a wonderful look on
that man's face as he related that incident of a specific prayer.
Be specific. Ask God for any right thing, but as a little child,
don't doubt. Doubt closes the power flow. Faith opens it. The
power of faith is so tremendous that there is nothing that
Almighty God cannot do for us, with us, or through us if we
let Him channel His power through our minds.
So roll those words around on your tongue. Say them over
and over again until they lodge deeply in your mind, until
they get down into your heart, until they take possession of
the essence of you:
"....whosoever shall say unto this mountain, be thou
removed, and be thou cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in
his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith
shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever he saith." (Mark
11:23)
129
I suggested these principles some months ago to an old
friend of mine, a man who perpetually expects the worst. Up
to the time of our discussion, never did I hear him say
anything other than that things would not turn out right. He
took this negative attitude toward every project or problem.
He expressed vigorous disbelief in the principles outlined in
this chapter and offered to make a test to prove that I am
wrong in my conclusions. He is an honest man, and he
faithfully tried these principles in connection with several
matters and actually kept a score card. He did this for six
months. He volunteered the information at the end of that
period that 85 percent of the matters under investigation had
turned out satisfactorily.
"I am now convinced," he said, "although I wouldn't have
believed it possible, but it is evidently a fact, that if you
expect the best, you are given some strange kind of power to
create conditions that produce the desired results. From now
on I am changing my mental attitude and shall expect the
best, not the worst. My test indicates that this is not theory,
but a scientific way to meet life's situations."
I might add that even the high percentage he attained can be
raised with practice, and of course practice in the art of
expectation is as essential as practice on a musical
instrument or with a golf club. Nobody ever mastered any
skill except through intensive, persistent, and intelligent
practice. Also it should be noted that my friend approached
this experiment at first in a spirit of doubt which would tend
adversely to affect his earlier results.
Every day as you confront the problems of life, I suggest that
you affirm as follows: "I believe God gives me power to
attain what I really want."
Never mention the worst. Never think of it. Drop it out of
your consciousness. At least ten times every day affirm, "I
expect the best and with God's help will attain the best."
130
In so doing your thoughts will turn toward the best and
become conditioned to its realization. This practice will
bring all of your powers to focus upon the attainment of the
best. It will bring the best to you.

131
Chapter 8
I Don't Believe in Defeat
IF YOU ARE thinking thoughts of defeat, I urge you to rid
yourself of such thoughts, for as you think defeat you tend to
get it. Adopt the "I don't believe in defeat" attitude.
I want to tell you about some people who have put this
philosophy into effect with excellent results and shall explain
the techniques and formulas which they used so successfully.
If you read these incidents carefully and thoughtfully and
believe as they did and think positively and put these
techniques into operation, you too, can overcome defeats
which at the present moment may seem inevitable.
I hope you are not like an "obstacle man" of whom I was
told. He was called an obstacle man because, regardless of
whatever suggestion was advanced, his mind instantly went
to all possible obstacles in connection with it, but he met his
match and learned a lesson which helped to change his
negative attitude. It came about in the following manner.
The directors of his firm had a project under consideration
which involved considerable expense and some definite
hazards as well as success possibilities. In the discussions
regarding this venture the obstacle man would invariably
say, and always with a scholarly air (invariably this type acts
wise, probably a cover-up for inner doubt feelings), "Now
just a moment. Let's consider the obstacles involved."
Another man, who said very little but who was respected by
his associates for his ability and achievements and for a
certain indomitable quality which characterized him,
presently spoke up and asked, "Why do you constantly
emphasize the obstacles in this proposition instead of the
possibilities?"
132
"Because," replied the obstacle man, "to be intelligent one
must always be realistic, and it is a fact that there are certain
definite obstacles in connection with this project. What
attitude would you take toward these obstacles, may I ask?"
The other man unhesitatingly replied, "What attitude would I
take toward these obstacles? Why, I would just remove them,
that's all, and then I would forget them."
"But," said the obstacle man, "that is easier said than done.
You say you would remove them and then you would forget
them. May I ask if you have any technique for removing
obstacles and for forgetting them that the rest of us have
never discovered?"
A slow smile came over the face of the other man as he said,
"Son, I have spent my entire life removing obstacles and I
never yet saw one that could not be removed provided you
had enough faith and guts and were willing to work. Since
you want to know how it's done, I will show you."
He then reached into his pocket and took out his wallet.
Under the isinglass window was a card on which were
written some words. He shoved the wallet across the table
and said, "There, son, read that. That is my formula, and
don't give me the song and dance that it won't work either. I
know better from experience."
The obstacle man picked up the wallet and with a strange
look on his face read the words to himself.
"Read them out loud," urged the owner of the wallet.
This is what he read in a slow, dubious voice, "I can do all
things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Philippians
4:13)
The owner of the wallet put it back in his pocket and said, "I
133
have lived a long time and have faced a lot of difficulties in
my time, but there is power in those words—actual power—
and with them you can remove any obstacle."
He said this with confidence and everybody knew he meant
it. This positiveness, together with the facts of his experience
which were known to all, for he was a remarkable man who
had overcome many odds, and because of the further fact
that he was not in any sense "holier than thou," made his
words convincing to the men around the table. At any rate,
there was no more negative talk. The project was put into
operation and, despite difficulties and risks, turned out
successfully.
The technique used by this man is based on the primary fact
about an obstacle which is—don't be afraid of it. Practice
believing that God is with you and that in combination with
Him you have the power to handle it.
So the first thing to do about an obstacle is simply to stand
up to it and not complain about it or whine under it but
forthrightly attack it. Don't go crawling through life on your
hands and knees half-defeated. Stand up to your obstacles
and do something about them. You will find that they haven't
half the strength you think they have.
A friend in England sent me a book by Winston Churchill
entitled Maxims and Reflections. In this book Churchill tells
of the British General Tudor, who commanded a division of
the British Fifth Army which faced the great German assault
in March 1918. The odds were heavily against him, but
General Tudor knew how to meet an apparently immovable
and undefeatable obstacle. His method was simple. He
merely stood and let the obstacle break on him and he, in
turn, broke the obstacle.
Here is what Churchill said about General Tudor. This is a
very great sentence and it is filled with power: "The
134
impression I had of Tudor was of an iron peg, hammered into
the frozen ground, immovable."
General Tudor knew how to stand up to an obstacle. Just
stand up to it, that's all, and don't give way under it, and it
will finally break You will break it. Something has to break,
and it won't be you, it will be the obstacle.
You can do this when you have faith, faith in God and faith
in yourself. Faith is the chief quality you need. It is enough.
In fact, it is more than enough.
Use that formula which the businessman suggested and you
will develop this brand of powerful faith in God and in
yourself. You will learn to know yourself, your own ability,
your power to do things. To the degree to which your attitude
shifts from negative to positive the mastery touch will come
to you. Then, with assurance, you can say to yourself under
any and all circumstances and mean it, "I don't believe in
defeat."
Take the story of Gonzales, who won the national tennis
championship a few years ago in a grueling battle. He had
been practically unknown, and because of wet weather he
had not been able to perfect his game prior to the
tournament. The sports writer of a metropolitan newspaper in
analyzing Gonzales said that there were certain defects in his
techniques, and gave it as his opinion that probably greater
champions had played on the courts, however, he credited
Gonzales with a marvelous serve and a skillful volley. But
the factor that won the championship, said the writer, was his
staying power and the further fact that "he was never
defeated by the discouraging vicissitudes of the game."
That is one of the most subtle lines I have ever read in any
sports story—"He was never defeated by the discouraging
vicissitudes of the game."
135
It means, does it not, that when the game seemed to go
against him he did not let discouragement creep in nor
negative thoughts dominate and thus lose the power needed
to win. This mental and spiritual quality made that man a
champion. He was able to face obstacles, to stand up to them
and overcome them.
Faith supplies staying power. It contains dynamic to keep
one going when the going is hard. Anybody can keep going
when the going is good, but some extra ingredient is needed
to enable you to keep fighting when it seems that everything
is against you. It is a great secret, that of never being
"defeated by the discouraging vicissitudes of the game."
You may counter, "But you don't know my circumstances. I
am in a different situation than anybody else and I am as far
down as a human being can get."
In that case you are fortunate, for if you are as far down as
you can get there is no further down you can go. There is
only one direction you can take from this position, and that is
up. So your situation is quite encouraging. However, I
caution you not to take the attitude that you are in a situation
in which nobody has ever been before. There is no such
situation.
Practically speaking, there are only a few human stories and
they have all been enacted previously. This is a fact that you
must never forget—there are people who have overcome
every conceivable difficult situation, even the one in which
you now find yourself and which to you seems utterly
hopeless. So did it seem to some others, but they found an
out, a way up, a path over, a pass through.
One of the most inspiring illustrations of this act is the story
of Amos Parrish who twice every year brings together
hundreds of leading department-store executives and style
experts in two huge clinics held in the Grand Ballroom of the
136
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York City. At these clinics
Mr. Parrish gives advice to the merchants and their
associates on business trends, on merchandise, on selling
methods, and other matters important to the conduct of their
business. Having attended a number of the clinics, however,
I am convinced that the greatest values Mr. Parrish transmits
to his customers are courage and positive thinking, a deep
belief in themselves, and the confidence that they can
overcome all difficulties.
He seems a living example of the philosophy which he
teaches. As a boy he was sickly. Moreover, he stuttered. He
was sensitive and a victim of an inferiority complex. It was
thought that he would not live because of his weakened
physical condition, but one day Amos Parrish had a spiritual
experience. Faith dawned in his mind, and from then on he
knew that with the help of God and the utilization of his own
powers he could achieve.
He developed a unique idea of service to businessmen, and
so highly do they rate it that they are willing to pay large fees
to attend a two-day session twice a year under the business
wisdom and inspiration of Amos Parrish. To me it is a
moving experience to sit with that big crowd in a hotel
ballroom and listen to "A. P.," as he is affectionately called,
talk positive thinking to those important businessmen and
women.
Sometimes he has the greatest difficulty with his stuttering,
but he is never discouraged. He refers to it frankly and with a
sense of humor. One day, for example, he was trying to say
the word Cadillac. He tried several times and was unable to
get it out, and finally did so with a powerful effort. Then he
commented, "I can't even say C-C-C-Cadillac, let alone buy
one." The audience roared with laughter, but I noted that they
looked up at him with affection written on their faces.
Everyone leaves a meeting at which he speaks with the
137
conviction that they, too, can turn their obstacles into assets.
Again I repeat, there is no difficulty you cannot overcome. A
wise and philosophical Negro man once said to me, when
asked how he overcame his difficulties, "How do I get
through a trouble? Well, first I try to go around it, and if I
can't go around it, I try to get under it, and if I can't get under
it, I try to go over it, and if I can't get over it, I just plow right
through it." Then he added, "God and I plow right through
it."
Take seriously that formula of a businessman given earlier in
this chapter. Stop reading for a moment and repeat it over to
yourself five times, and each time you say it conclude with
this affirmation, "I believe that." Here is the formula again,
"I can do all things through Christ which strengthened
me." (Philippians 4:13) Say that five times every day and it
will release indomitable power in your mind.
Your subconscious, which always resents any change, may
say to you, "You don't believe any such thing." But
remember that your subconscious mind in a sense is one of
the greatest liars in existence. It concurs in and sends back to
you your own errors about your abilities. You have created
the negative attitude in your subconscious and it gives this
error back to you. So just turn on your subconscious and say
to it, "Now look here, I do believe that. I insist upon
believing it." If you talk to your subconscious mind with that
positiveness, in due course it will be convinced. One reason
is because you are now feeding it positive thoughts. In other
words, you are at last telling the truth to your subconscious.
After a while your subconscious mind will begin to send
back the truth to you, the truth being that with the help of
Jesus Christ there isn't any obstacle you cannot overcome.
An effective method for making your subconscious positive
in character is to eliminate certain expressions of thought and
138
speech which we may call the "little negatives." These socalled "little negatives" clutter up the average person's
conversation, and while each one is seemingly unimportant
in itself, the total effect of these attitudes is to condition the
mind negatively. When this thought of "little negatives" first
occurred to me, I began to analyze my own conversational
habits and was shocked by what I found. I discovered that I
was making such statements as, "I'm afraid I'll be late," or "I
wonder if I'll have a flat tire," or "I don't think I can do that,"
or "I'll never get through this job. There's so much to do." If
something turned out badly, I might say, "Oh, that's just what
I expected." Or, again, I might observe a few clouds in the
sky and would gloomily state, "I knew it was going to rain."
These are "little negatives" to be sure, and a big thought is of
course more powerful than a little one, but it must never be
forgotten that "mighty oaks from little acorns grow," and if a
mass of "little negatives" clutter up your conversation, they
are bound to seep into your mind. It is surprising how they
accumulate in force, and presently, before you know it, they
will grow into "big negatives." So I determined to go to work
on the "little negatives" and root them out of my
conversation. I found that the best way to eliminate them was
deliberately to say a positive word about everything. When
you keep asserting that things are going to work out well,
that you can do the job, that you will not have a flat tire, that
you will get there on time, by talking up good results you
invoke the law of positive effects and good results occur.
Things do turn out well.
On a roadside billboard I saw an advertisement of a certain
brand of motor oil. The slogan read, "A clean engine always
delivers power." So will a mind free of negatives produce
positives, that is to say, a clean mind will deliver power.
Therefore flush out your thoughts, give yourself a clean
mental engine, remembering that a clean mind, even as a
clean engine, always delivers power.
139
So to overcome your obstacles and live the "I don't believe in
defeat" philosophy, cultivate a positive-idea pattern deeply in
your consciousness. What we do with obstacles is directly
determined by our mental attitude. Most of our obstacles, as
a matter of fact, are mental in character.
"Ah," you may object, "mine are not mental, mine are real."
Perhaps so, but your attitude toward them is mental. The
only possible way you can have an attitude is by the mental
process, and what you think about your obstacles largely
determines what you do about them. Form the mental
attitude that you cannot remove an obstacle and you will not
remove it, not if you think you can't. But get the idea firmly
fixed that the obstacle is not so great as you previously
considered it to be. Hold the idea that it is removable, and
however faintly you entertain this positive thought, from the
very moment you begin to think in this manner, the process
is inaugurated which will lead to its ultimate removal.
If you have been long defeated by a difficulty, it is probably
because you have told yourself for weeks, months, and even
for years that there is nothing you can do about it. You have
so emphasized your inability to yourself that your mind
gradually accepted the conclusion upon which you have
insisted, and when your mind is convinced, you are
convinced, for as you think so are you.
But, on the contrary, when you employ this new and creative
concept, "I can do all things through Christ," then you
develop a new mental slant. Emphasize and re-emphasize
that positive attitude and you will finally convince your own
consciousness that you can do something about difficulties.
When at last your mind becomes convinced, astonishing
results will begin to happen. Of a sudden you discover that
you have the power you would never acknowledge.
I played golf with a man who was not only an excellent
golfer but a philosopher as well. As we went around the golf
140
course the game itself drew out of him certain gems of
wisdom for one of which I shall ever be grateful.
I hit a ball into the rough, into some high grass. When we
came up to my ball I said in some dismay, "Now just look at
that. I certainly am in the rough. I have a bad lie. It is going
to be tough getting out of here."
My friend grinned and said, "Didn't I read something about
positive thinking in your books?"
Sheepishly I acknowledged that such was the case.
"I wouldn't think negatively about that lie of yours," he said
"Do you think you could get a good hit if this ball were lying
out on the fairway on the short grass?"
I said I thought so.
"Well," he continued, "why do you think you could do better
out there than here?"
"Because," I replied, "the grass is cut short on the fairway
and the ball can get away better."
Then he did a curious thing. "Let's get down on our hands
and knees," he suggested, "and examine the situation. Let's
see just how this ball does lie."
So we got down on our hands and knees, and he said,
"Observe that the relative height of the ball here is about the
same as it would be on the fairway, the only difference being
that you have about five or six inches of grass above the
ball."
Then he did an even more whimsical thing. "Notice the
quality and character of this grass," he said. He pulled off a
blade and handed it to me. "Chew it," he said.
141
I chewed, and he asked, "Isn't that tender?"
"Why, yes," I replied. "It certainly does seem to be tender
grass."
"Well," he continued, "an easy swing of your number-five
iron will cut through that grass almost like a knife." And then
he gave me this sentence which I am going to remember as
long as I live, and I hope you will also.
"The rough is only mental. In other words," he continued, "it
is rough because you think it is. In your mind you have
decided that here is an obstacle which will cause you
difficulty. The power to overcome this obstacle is in your
mind. If you visualize yourself lifting that ball out of the
rough, believing you can do it, your mind will transfer
flexibility, rhythm, and power to your muscles and you will
handle that club in such a manner that the ball will rise right
out of there in a beautiful shot. All you need to do is to keep
your eye on that ball and tell yourself that you are going to
lift it out of that grass with a lovely stroke. Let the stiffness
and tension go out of you. Hit it with exhilaration and power.
Remember, the rough is only mental."
To this day I remember the thrill, the sense of power and
delight I had in the clean shot that dropped the ball to the
edge of the green.
That is a very great fact to remember in connection with
difficult problems—"the rough is only mental."
Your obstacles are present all right. They are not fanciful,
but they are not actually so difficult as they seem. Your
mental attitude is the most important factor. Believe that
Almighty God has put in you the power to lift yourself out of
the rough by keeping your eye firmly fixed on the source of
your power. Affirm to yourself that through this power you
can do anything you have to do. Believe that this power is
142
taking the tension out of you, that this power is flowing
through you. Believe this, and a sense of victory will come.
Now take another look at that obstacle that has been
bothering you. You will find that it isn't so formidable as you
thought. Say to yourself, "The rough is only mental. I think
victory—I get victory." Remember that formula. Write it on
a piece of paper, put it in your wallet, stick it up on your
mirror where you shave each morning, put it over the kitchen
sink, put it on your dressing table and on your desk—keep
looking at it until its truth drives into the depths of your
consciousness, until it permeates your whole mental attitude,
until it becomes a positive obsession—"I can do all things
through Christ which strengtheneth me."
What may seem to be a difficult proposition is, as I have
pointed out, hard or easy in proportion to how we think about
it. It may be said that three men vitally affected the thought
processes of Americans—Emerson, Thoreau, and William
James. Analyze the American mind even to this late date and
it is evident that the teachings of these three philosophers
combined to create that particular genius of the American
who is not defeated by obstacles and who accomplishes
"impossibles" with amazing efficiency.
A fundamental doctrine of Emerson is that the human
personality can be touched with Divine power and thus
greatness can be released from it. William James pointed out
that the greatest factor in any undertaking is one's belief
about it. Thoreau told us that the secret of achievement is to
hold a picture of a successful outcome in mind.
Still another wise American was Thomas Jefferson, who, like
Franklin, set for his guidance a series of rules. Franklin had
thirteen daily rules; Jefferson only ten. One of Jefferson's
rules was this, and I think it is priceless, "Always take hold
of things by the smooth handle." That is, go at a job or at
your difficulty by the use of a method that will encounter the
143
least resistance. Resistance causes friction in mechanics,
therefore it is necessary in mechanics to overcome or reduce
friction. The negative attitude is a friction approach. That is
why negativism develops such great resistance. The positive
approach is the "smooth handle" technique. It is in harmony
with the flow of the universe. It not only encounters less
resistance, but actually stimulates assistance forces. It is
remarkable how from early life until the end of your
existence the application of this philosophy will enable you
to attain successful results in areas where otherwise you
would be defeated.
For example, a woman sent her fifteen-year-old son to us.
She said she wanted him "straightened out." It annoyed her
to no end that her boy could never get over 70 in any of his
studies. "This boy has a great mind potentially," she declared
proudly.
"How do you know he has a great mind?" I asked.
"Because he is my son," she said. "I graduated from college
magna cum laude"
The boy came in very glumly, so I asked, "What's the matter,
son?"
"I don't know. My mother sent me to see you."
"Well," I commented, "You don't seem to be burning with
enthusiasm. Your mother says you get only 70's."
"Yes," he said, "that's all I get, and," he added, "that isn't the
worst of it. I've even received less than that."
"Do you think you have a good mind, son?" I asked.
"My mother says I have. I don't know—I think I'm awful
dumb. Dr. Peale," he said earnestly, "I study the stuff. At
144
home I read it over once and then close the book and try to
remember it. I repeat this process about three times, and then
I think that if three times doesn't get it into my head how am
I ever going to get it into my head? And then I go to school
thinking maybe I have it, and the teacher calls on me to say
something, and I stand up and can't remember a thing. Then,"
he said, "examinations come along and I sit there and just get
hot and cold all over and I can't think of the answers. I don't
know why," he continued. "I know that my mother was a
great scholar. I guess I just haven't got it in me."
This negative thought pattern combined with the inferiority
feeling stimulated by his mother's attitude was of course
overwhelming him. He froze up in his mind. His mother had
never told him to go to school and study for the wonder and
glory of learning knowledge. She was not wise enough to
encourage him to compete with himself rather than with
others. And she was constantly insisting that he duplicate her
success in scholarship. Little wonder that under this pressure
he froze mentally.
I gave him some suggestions that proved helpful. "Before
you read your lessons, pause a moment and pray in this
manner, 'Lord, I know I have a good mind and that I can get
my work.' Then get yourself relaxed and read the book
without strain. Imagine you are reading a story. Do not read
it twice unless you wish. Simply believe that you got it on
the first reading. Visualize the material as soaking in and
germinating. Then next morning, as you go to school, say to
yourself, 'I have a wonderful mother. She is very pretty and
sweet, but she must have been an old bookworm to get those
high marks. And who wants to be an old bookworm anyway?
I don't want to become magna cum nothing. I only want to
get through school creditably.'
"In class, when the teacher calls on you, quickly pray before
answering. Then believe the Lord will at that moment help
145
your mind to deliver. When an examination is given, affirm
in prayer that God is releasing your mind and that the right
answers are given you."
The boy followed these ideas, and what marks do you think
he got the following semester? Ninety! I am sure that this
boy, having discovered the amazing workability of the "I
don't believe in defeat philosophy," will employ the amazing
power of positive thinking in all the affairs of his life.
I could use so many illustrations of the manner in which
men's lives have been revamped by these procedures that this
book would grow to unwieldy size. Moreover, these are
incidents and experiences out of everyday life that are in no
way theoretical, but are entirely practical. My mail is literally
filled with testimonials sent by people who, having heard or
read accounts I have told of victorious life experiences, have
felt moved to relate similar occurrences in their own lives.
Such a letter came from a gentleman who tells about his
father as follows. I know several people who have used the
plan in this letter with amazing results.
"My father was a traveling salesman. One time he sold
furniture, another time hardware, sometimes it was leather
goods. He changed his line every year.
"I would hear him telling Mother that this was his last trip in
stationery or in bed lamps or whatever it was he was selling
at the moment. Next year everything would be different; we
would be on Easy Street. He had a chance to go with a firm
that had a product that sold itself. It was always the same.
My father never had a product that sold. He was always
tense, always afraid of himself, always whistling in the dark.
"Then one day a fellow salesman gave father a copy of a
little three-sentence prayer. He was told to repeat it just
before calling on a customer. Father tried it, and the results
146
were almost miraculous. He sold 85 percent of all calls made
during the first week, and every week thereafter the results
were wonderful. Some weeks the percentage ran as high as
95, and Father had sixteen weeks in which he sold every
customer called on.
"Father gave this prayer to several other salesmen, and in
each case it brought astounding results.
"The prayer my father used is as follows:
'I believe I am always divinely guided.
I believe I will always take the right turn of the road.
I believe God will always make a way where there is no
way.' "
The head of a small firm who had a great many difficulties in
establishing his business told me that he was immeasurably
helped by a technique which he invented. He had trouble, he
said, with the tendency to "blow up" a small difficulty into a
seemingly insurmountable obstacle. He knew that he was
approaching his problems in a defeatist attitude, and had
common sense enough to realize that these obstacles were
not so difficult as he made them appear to be. As he told the
story, I wondered if he did not have that curious
psychological difficulty known as the will to fail.
He employed a device which reconditioned his mental
attitude and after a time had a noticeable effect on his
business. He simply placed a large wire basket on his office
desk. The following words were printed on a card and wired
to this basket, "With God all things are possible." Whenever
a problem came up which the old mechanism of defeat began
to develop into a big difficulty, he threw the paper pertaining
to it into the basket marked "With God all things are
possible" and let it rest there for a day or two. "It is queer
147
how each matter when I took it out of that basket again didn't
seem difficult at all," he reported.
In this act he dramatized the mental attitude of putting the
problem in God's hands. As a result he received power to
handle the problem normally and therefore successfully.
As you finish this chapter please say the following line
aloud: "I don't believe in defeat." Continue to affirm that
until the idea dominates your subconscious attitudes.

148
Chapter 9
How to Break the Worry Habit
YOU DO NOT need to be a victim of worry. Reduced to its
simplest form, what is worry? It is simply an unhealthy and
destructive mental habit. You were not born with the worry
habit. You acquired it. And because you can change any
habit and any acquired attitude, you can cast worry from
your mind. Since aggressive, direct action is essential in the
elimination process, there is just one proper time to begin an
effective attack on worry, and that is now. So let us start
breaking your worry habit at once.
Why should we take the worry problem this seriously? The
reason is clearly stated by Dr. Smiley Blanton, eminent
psychiatrist, "Anxiety is the great modern plague."
A famous psychologist asserts that "fear is the most
disintegrating enemy of human personality," and a prominent
physician declares that "worry is the most subtle and
destructive of all human diseases."
Another physician tells us that thousands of people are ill
because of "dammed-up anxiety." These sufferers have been
unable to expel their anxieties which have turned inward on
the personality, causing many forms of ill-health. The
destructive quality of worry is indicated by the fact that the
word itself is derived from an old Anglo-Saxon word
meaning "to choke." If someone were to put his fingers
around your throat and press hard, cutting off the flow of
vital power, it would be a dramatic demonstration of what
you do to yourself by long-held and habitual worry.
We are told that worry is not infrequently a factor in arthritis.
Physicians who have analyzed the causes of this prevalent
disease assert that the following factors, at least some of
149
them, are nearly always present in arthritic cases: financial
disaster, frustration, tension, apprehension, loneliness, grief,
long-held ill will, and habitual worry.
A clinic staff is said to have made a study of one hundred
seventy-six American executives of the average age of fortyfour years and discovered that one half had high blood
pressure, heart disease, or ulcers. It was notable in every case
of those thus afflicted that worry was a prominent factor.
The worrier, so it seems, is not likely to live as long as the
person who learns to overcome his worries. The Rotarian
magazine carried an article entitled "How Long Can You
Live?" The author says that the waistline is the measure of
your life line. The article also declares that if you want to
live long, observe the following rules: (1) Keep calm. (2) Go
to church. (3) Eliminate worry.
A survey shows that church members live longer than nonchurch members (better join the church if you don't want to
die young). Married people, according to the article, live
longer than single people. Perhaps this is because a married
couple can divide the worry. When you are single, you have
to do it all alone.
A scientific expert on length of life made a study of some
450 people who lived to be one hundred years of age. He
found that these people lived long and contented lives for the
following reasons: (1) They kept busy. (2) They used
moderation in all things. (3) They ate lightly and simply. (4)
They got a great deal of fun out of life. (5) They were early
to bed and early up. (6) They were free from worry and fear,
especially fear of death. (7) They had serene minds and faith
in God.
Haven't you often heard a person say, "I am almost sick with
worry," and then add with a laugh, "But I guess worry never
really makes you ill." But that is where he is wrong. Worry
150
can make you ill.
Dr. George W. Crile, famous American surgeon, said, "We
fear not only in our minds but in our hearts, brains, and
viscera, that whatever the cause of fear and worry, the effect
can always be noted in the cells, tissues, and organs of the
body."
Dr. Stanley Cobb, neurologist, says that worry is intimately
connected with the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.
A doctor recently stated that there is an epidemic of fear and
worry in this country. "All doctors," he declared, "are having
cases of illness which are brought on directly by fear, and
aggravated by worry and a feeling of insecurity."
But do not be discouraged, for you can overcome your
worries. There is a remedy that will bring you sure relief. It
can help you break the worry habit. And the first step to take
in breaking it is simply to believe that you can. Whatever
you believe you can do, you can do, with God's help.
Here, then, is a practical procedure which will help to
eliminate abnormal worry from your experience.
Practice emptying the mind daily. This should be done
preferably before retiring at night to avoid the retention by
the consciousness of worries while you sleep. During sleep,
thoughts tend to sink more deeply into the subconscious. The
last five minutes before going to sleep are of extraordinary
importance, for in that brief period the mind is most
receptive to suggestion. It tends to absorb the last ideas that
are entertained in waking consciousness.
This process of mind drainage is important in overcoming
worry, for fear thoughts, unless drained off, can clog the
mind and impede the flow of mental and spiritual power. But
such thoughts can be emptied from the mind and will not
151
accumulate if they are eliminated daily. To drain them,
utilize a process of creative imagination. Conceive of
yourself as actually emptying your mind of all anxiety and
fear. Picture all worry thoughts as flowing out as you would
let water flow from a basin by removing the stopper. Repeat
the following affirmation during this visualization: "With
God's help I am now emptying my mind of all anxiety, all
fear, all sense of insecurity." Repeat this slowly five times,
then add, "I believe that my mind is now emptied of all
anxiety, all fear, all sense of insecurity." Repeat that
statement five times, meanwhile holding a mental picture of
your mind as being emptied of these concepts. Then thank
God for thus freeing you from fear. Then go to sleep.
In starting the curative process the foregoing method should
be utilized in midmorning and midafternoon as well as at
bedtime. Go into some quiet place for five minutes for this
purpose. Faithfully perform this process and you will soon
note beneficial results.
The procedure may be further strengthened by imaginatively
thinking of yourself as reaching into your mind and one by
one removing your worries. A small child possesses an
imaginative skill superior to that of adults. A child responds
to the game of kissing away a hurt or throwing away a fear.
This simple process works for the child because in his mind
he believes that that is actually the end of it. The dramatic act
is a fact for him and so it proves to be the end of the matter.
Visualize your fears as being drained out of your mind and
the visualization will in due course be actualized.
Imagination is a source of fear, but imagination may also be
the cure of fear. "Imagineering" is the use of mental images
to build factual results, and it is an astonishingly effective
procedure. Imagination is not simply the use of fancy. The
word imagination derives from the idea of imaging. That is
to say, you form an image either of fear or of release from
152
fear. What you "image" (imagine) may ultimately become a
fact if held mentally with sufficient faith.
Therefore hold an image of yourself as delivered from worry
and the drainage process will in time eliminate abnormal fear
from your thoughts. However, it is not enough to empty the
mind, for the mind will not long remain empty. It must be
occupied by something. It cannot continue in a state of
vacuum. Therefore, upon emptying the mind, practice
refilling it. Fill it with thoughts of faith, hope, courage,
expectancy. Say aloud such affirmations as the following:
"God is now filling my mind with courage, with peace, with
calm assurance. God is now protecting me from all harm.
God is now protecting my loved ones from all harm. God is
now guiding me to right decisions. God will see me through
this situation"
A half-dozen times each day crowd your mind with such
thoughts as these until the mind is overflowing with them. In
due course these thoughts of faith will crowd out worry. Fear
is the most powerful of all thoughts with one exception, and
that one exception is faith. Faith can always overcome fear.
Faith is the one power against which fear cannot stand. Day
by day, as you fill your mind with faith, there will ultimately
be no room left for fear. This is the one great fact that no one
should forget. Master faith and you will automatically master
fear.
So the process is—empty the mind and cauterize it with
God's grace, then practice filling your mind with faith and
you will break the worry habit.
Fill your mind with faith and in due course the accumulation
of faith will crowd out fear. It will not be of much value
merely to read this suggestion unless you practice it. And the
time to begin practicing it is now while you think of it and
while you are convinced that the number-one procedure in
breaking the worry habit is to drain the mind daily of fear
153
and fill the mind daily with faith. It is just as simple as that.
Learn to be a practicer of faith until you become an expert in
faith. Then fear cannot live in you.
The importance of freeing your mind of fear cannot be
overemphasized. Fear something over a long period of time
and there is a real possibility that by fearing you may
actually help bring it to pass. The Bible contains a line which
is one of the most terrible statements ever made—terrible in
its truth: "For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon
me..." (Job 3:25) Of course it will, for if you fear something
continuously you tend to create conditions in your mind
propitious to the development of that which you fear. An
atmosphere is encouraged in which it can take root and grow.
You tend to draw it to yourself.
But do not be alarmed. The Bible also constantly reiterates
another great truth, "That which I have greatly believed has
come upon me." It does not make that statement in so many
words, and yet again and again and still again the Bible tells
us that if we have faith "nothing is impossible" unto us, and
"according to your faith be it done unto you." So if you shift
your mind from fear to faith you will stop creating the object
of your fear and will, instead, actualize the object of your
faith. Surround your mind with healthy thoughts, thoughts of
faith, and not fear, and you will produce faith results instead
of fear results.
Strategy must be used in the campaign against the worry
habit. A frontal attack on the main body of worry with the
expectation of conquering it may prove difficult. Perhaps a
more adroit plan is to conquer the outer fortifications one by
one, gradually closing in on the main position.
To change the figure, it might be well to snip off the little
worries on the farthest branches of your fear. Then work
back and finally destroy the main trunk of worry.
154
At my farm it was necessary to take down a large tree, much
to my regret. Cutting down a great old tree is fraught with
sadness. Men came with a motor-driven saw and I expected
them to start by cutting through the main trunk near the
ground. Instead, they put up ladders and began snipping off
the small branches, then the larger ones, and finally the top
of the tree. Then all that remained was the huge central
trunk, and in a few moments my tree lay neatly stacked as
though it had not spent fifty years in growing.
"If we had cut the tree at the ground before trimming off the
branches, it would have broken nearby trees in falling. It is
easier to handle a tree the smaller you can make it," so
explained the tree man.
The vast tree of worry which over long years has grown up
in your personality can best be handled by making it as small
as possible. Thus it is advisable to snip off the little worries
and expressions of worry. For example, reduce the number
of worry words in your conversation. Words maybe the
result of worry, but they also create worry. When a worry
thought comes to mind, immediately remove it with a faith
thought and expression. For example: "I'm worried that I will
miss the train." Then start early enough to be sure you get
there on time. The less worrying you do, the more likely you
are to start promptly, for the uncluttered mind is systematic
and is able to regulate time.
As you snip off these small worries you will gradually cut
back to the main trunk of worry. Then with your developed
greater power you will be able to eliminate basic worry, i.e.,
the worry habit, from your life.
My friend Dr. Daniel A. Poling gives a valuable suggestion.
He says that every morning before he arises he repeats these
two words, "I believe," three times. Thus at the day's
beginning he conditions his mind to faith, and it never leaves
him. His mind accepts the conviction that by faith he is going
155
to overcome his problems and difficulties during the day. He
starts the day with creative positive thoughts in his mind. He
"believes," and it is very difficult to hold back the man who
believes.
I related Dr. Poling's "I believe" technique in a radio talk and
had a letter from a woman who told me that she had not been
very faithful to her religion which happened to be the Jewish
faith. She said their home was filled with contention,
bickering, worry, and unhappiness. Her husband, she
declared, "drank far too much for his own good" and sat
around all day doing no work. He weakly complained that he
couldn't find a job. This woman's mother-in-law lived with
her and the latter "whined and complained of her aches and
pains all the while."
This woman said that Dr. Poling's method impressed her and
she decided to try it herself. So the next morning upon
awakening she affirmed, "I believe, I believe, I believe." In
her letter she excitedly reported, "It has been only ten days
since I started this plan and my husband came home last
night and told me he had a job paying $80 a week. And he
also says that he is going to quit drinking. I believe he means
it. What is even more wonderful, my mother-in-law has
practically stopped complaining of her aches and pains. It is
almost as if a miracle has happened in this house. My
worries seem to have just about disappeared."
That does indeed seem almost magical, and yet that miracle
happens every day to people who shift over from negative
fear thoughts to positive faith thoughts and attitudes.
My good friend, the late Howard Chandler Christy, the artist,
had many a sound anti-worry technique. Scarcely ever have I
known a man so filled with the joy and delight of life. He
had an indomitable quality, and his happiness was infectious.
My church has a policy of having the minister's portrait
156
painted sometime during his pastorate. This portrait hangs in
the minister's home until his death, when it reverts to the
church and is placed in a gallery along with pictures of his
predecessors. It is usually the policy of the Board of Elders
and Deacons to have a portrait painted when in their wise
judgment the minister is at the height of his good looks
(mine was painted several years ago).
While sitting for Mr. Christy, I asked, "Howard, don't you
ever worry?"
He laughed. "No, not on your life. I don't believe in it."
"Well," I commented, "that is quite a simple reason for not
worrying. In fact, it seems to me too simple—you just don't
believe in it, therefore you don't do it. Haven't you ever
worried?" I asked.
He replied, "Well, yes, I tried it once. I noticed that
everybody else seemed to worry and I figured I must be
missing something, so one day I made up my mind to try it. I
set aside a day and said, 'That is to be my worry day.' I
decided I would investigate this worry business and do some
worrying just to see what it was like.
"The night before the day came I went to bed early to get a
good night's sleep to be rested up to do a good job of
worrying the next day. In the morning I got up, ate a good
breakfast—for you can't worry successfully on an empty
stomach—and then decided to get to my worrying. Well, I
tried my best to worry until along about noon, but I just
couldn't make heads nor tails of it. It didn't make sense to
me, so I just gave it up."
He laughed one of those infectious laughs of his.
"But," I said, "you must have some other method of
overcoming worry." He did indeed, and it is perhaps the best
157
method of all.
"Every morning I spend fifteen minutes filling my mind full
of God," he said. "When your mind is full of God, there is no
room for worry. I fill my mind full of God every day and I
have the time of my life all day long."
Howard Christy was a great artist with a brush, but he was an
equally great artist with life because he was able to take a
great truth and simplify it down to its basic fact, namely, that
only that comes out of the mind which originally you put
into the mind. Fill the mind with thoughts of God rather than
with thoughts of fear, and you will get back thoughts of faith
and courage.
Worry is a destructive process of occupying the mind with
thoughts contrary to God's love and care. Basically that is all
worry is. The cure is to fill the mind with thoughts of God's
power, His protection, and His goodness. So spend fifteen
minutes daily filling your mind full of God. Cram your mind
full of the "I believe philosophy," and you will have no
mental room left to accommodate thoughts of worry and lack
of faith.
Many people fail to overcome such troubles as worry
because, unlike Howard Christy, they allow the problem to
seem complicated and do not attack it with some simple
technique. It is surprising how our most difficult personal
problems often yield to an uncomplicated methodology. This
is due to the fact that it is not enough to know what to do
about difficulties. We must also know how to do that which
should be done.
The secret is to work out a method of attack and keep
working it. There is value in doing something that dramatizes
to our own minds that an effective counterattack is in
process. In so doing we bring spiritual forces to bear upon
the problem in a manner both understandable and usable.
158
One of the best illustrations of this technique strategy against
worry was a scheme developed by a businessman. He was a
tremendous worrier. In fact he was fast getting himself into a
bad state of nerves and ill-health. His particular form of
worry was that he was always doubtful as to whether he had
done or said the right thing. He was always rehashing his
decisions and getting himself unnerved about them. He was a
post-mortem expert. He is an exceptionally intelligent man,
in fact a graduate of two universities, in both instances with
honors. I suggested that he ought to work out some simple
method that would help him to drop the day when it was over
and go ahead into the future and forget it. I explained the
gripping effectiveness of simple, dramatized spiritual truth.
It is always true that the greatest minds have the best ability
to be simple, that is, they have the capacity to work out some
simple plans for putting profound truths into operation, and
this man did that in connection with his worries. I noticed
that he was improving and commented on it.
"Oh, yes," he said, "I finally got the secret and it has worked
amazingly well." He said that if I would drop into his office
sometime toward the close of the day he would show me
how he had broken the worry habit. He telephoned me one
day and asked me to have dinner that evening. I met him at
his office at closing time. He explained that he had broken
his worry habit by working out "a little ritual" that he
performed every night before leaving his office. And it was
very unique. It made a lasting impression upon me.
We picked up our hats and coats and started toward the door.
By the door of his office stood a wastebasket and above it on
the wall was a calendar. It was not one of those calendars
where you see a week or a month, or three months, it was a
one-day calendar. You could see only one date at a time, and
that date was in large print. He said, "Now I will perform my
evening ritual, the one that has helped me break the worry
159
habit.
He reached up and tore off the calendar page for that
particular day. He rolled it into a small ball and I watched
with fascination as his fingers slowly opened and he dropped
that "day" into the wastebasket. Then he closed his eyes and
his lips moved, and I knew that he was praying, so was
respectfully silent. Upon finishing his prayer he said aloud,
"Amen. O.K., the day is over. Come on, let's go out and
enjoy ourselves."
As we walked down the street I asked, "Would you mind
telling me what you said in that prayer?"
He laughed and said, "I don't think it is your kind of prayer."
But I persisted, and he said, "Well, I pray something like
this: 'Lord, you gave me this day. I didn't ask for it, but I was
glad to have it. I did the best I could with it and you helped
me, and I thank you. I made some mistakes. That was when I
didn't follow your advice, and I am sorry about that. Forgive
me. But I had some victories and some successes, too, and I
am grateful for your guidance. But now, Lord, mistakes or
successes, victories or defeats, the day is over and I'm
through with it, so I'm giving it back to you. Amen.' "
Perhaps that isn't an orthodox prayer, but it certainly proved
to be an effective one. He dramatized the finishing of the day
and he set his face to the future, expecting to do better the
next day. He co-operated with God's method. When the day
is over, God blacks it out by bringing down the curtain of
night. By this method this man's past mistakes and failures,
his sins of omission and commission gradually lost their hold
on him. He was released from the worries that accumulated
from his yesterdays. In this technique this man was
practicing one of the most effective anti-worry formulas,
which is described in these words, "...but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth
unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark
160
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus." (Philippians 3:13-14)
Other practical anti-worry techniques may suggest
themselves to you, and I should like to hear of those which
after careful use prove effective. I believe that all of us who
are interested in self-improvement are fellow students in
God's great spiritual laboratory. Together we work out
practical methods of successful living. People from
everywhere are kind enough to write me about their methods
and the results attained. I try to be helpful in making tested
methods available to others through books, sermons,
newspaper columns, radio, television, and other media. In
this manner there can be developed a great many people who
have the know-how for overcoming not only worry but other
personal problems as well.
To conclude this chapter in a manner designed to help you
go to work now to break the worry habit, I list a ten-point
worry-breaking formula.
1. Say to yourself, "Worry is just a very bad mental habit.
And I can change any habit with God's help."
2. You became a worrier by practicing worry. You can
become free of worry by practicing the opposite and stronger
habit of faith. With all the strength and perseverance you can
command, start practicing faith.
3. How do you practice faith? First thing every morning
before you arise say out loud, "I believe," three times.
4. Pray, using this formula, "I place this day, my life, my
loved ones, my work in the Lord's hands. There is no harm in
the Lord's hands, only good. Whatever happens, whatever
results, if I am in the Lord's hands it is the Lord's will and it
is good."
161
5. Practice saying something positive concerning everything
about which you have been talking negatively. Talk
positively. For example, don't say, "This is going to be a
terrible day." Instead, affirm, "This is going to be a glorious
day." Don't say, "I'll never be able to do that." Instead,
affirm, "With God's help I will do that."
6. Never participate in a worry conversation. Shoot an
injection of faith into all your conversations. A group of
people talking pessimistically can infect every person in the
group with negativism. But by talking things up rather than
down you can drive off that depressing atmosphere and make
everyone feel hopeful and happy.
7. One reason you are a worrier is that your mind is literally
saturated with apprehension thoughts, defeat thoughts,
gloomy thoughts. To counteract, mark every passage in the
Bible that speaks of faith, hope, happiness, glory, radiance.
Commit each to memory. Say them over and over again until
these creative thoughts saturate your subconscious mind.
Then the subconscious will return to you what you have
given it, namely, optimism, not worry.
8. Cultivate friendships with hopeful people. Surround
yourself with friends who think positive, faith-producing
thoughts and who contribute to a creative atmosphere. This
will keep you re-stimulated with faith attitudes.
9. See how many people you can help to cure their own
worry habit. In helping another to overcome worry you get
greater power over it within yourself.
10. Every day of your life conceive of yourself as living in
partnership and companionship with Jesus Christ. If He
actually walked by your side, would you be worried or
afraid? Well, then, say to yourself, "He is with me." Affirm
aloud, "I am with you always." Then change it to say, "He is
with me now." Repeat that affirmation three times every day.
162
Chapter 10
Power to Solve Personal Problems
I WANT TO tell you about some fortunate people who found
the right solution to their problems.
They followed a simple but highly practical plan and in each
case the outcome was a happy and successful one. These
people are in no sense different than you. They had the same
problems and difficulties that you have, but they found a
formula which helped them to get the right answers to the
difficult questions facing them. This same formula applied
by you can get similar results.
First, let me tell you the story of a husband and wife,
longtime friends of mine. For years Bill, the husband,
worked hard until he finally reached the rung next to the top
of the ladder in his company. He was in line for the
presidency of the firm and felt certain that upon retirement of
the president he would be advanced to that position. There
was no apparent reason why his ambition should not be
realized, for by ability, training, and experience he was
qualified. Besides, he had been led to believe he was to be
chosen.
However, when the appointment was made he was bypassed.
A man was brought in from the outside to fill the post.
I arrived in his city just after the blow had fallen. The wife,
Mary, was in an especially vindictive state of mind. At
dinner she bitterly outlined all that she would "like to tell
them." The intense disappointment, humiliation, frustration,
focused in a burning anger which she poured out to her
husband and me.
Bill,

on

the

contrary,

was

quiet.

Obviously
163

hurt,
disappointed, and bewildered, he took it courageously. Being
essentially a gentle person, it was not surprising that he
failed to become angry or violent in his reaction. Mary
wanted him to resign immediately. She urged him to "tell
them off and tell them plenty, then quit."
He seemed disinclined to take this action, saying perhaps it
was for the best and he would go along with the new man
and help him in any way that he could.
That attitude admittedly might be difficult, but he had
worked for the company for so long that he would not be
happy elsewhere, and, besides, he felt that in the secondary
position the company could continue to use him.
The wife then turned to me and asked what I would do. I told
her that I would, like herself, undoubtedly feel disappointed
and hurt, but that I would try not to allow hate to creep in, for
animosity not only corrodes the soul, but disorganizes
thought processes as well.
I suggested that what we needed was Divine guidance, a
wisdom beyond ourselves in this situation. There was such
an emotional content in the problem that we might possibly
be incapable of thinking the matter through objectively and
rationally.
I suggested, therefore, that we have a few minutes of
quietness, no one saying anything, that we sit quietly in an
attitude of fellowship and prayer, turning our thoughts to the
One who said, "Where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matthew 18:20)
I pointed out that there were three of us, and if we sought to
achieve the spirit of being gathered in "His" name, He would
also be present to quiet us and show us what to do.
It was not easy for the wife to accommodate herself to the
mood suggested, but basically she was an intelligent, high164
type person, and she joined in the plan.
Presently, after a few quiet minutes, I suggested that we join
hands, and even though we were in a public restaurant I
would quietly offer a prayer. In the prayer I asked for
guidance. I requested peace of mind for Bill and Mary, and I
went a step further and even asked God's blessing upon the
new appointee. I also prayed that Bill would be able to fit in
with the new administration and give more effective service
than before.
After the prayer we sat silent for a time, then with a sigh the
wife said, "Yes, I guess that is the way to do it. When I knew
you were coming to dinner with us I feared that you would
tell us to take a Christian position on this. Frankly, I didn't
feel like doing that. I was boiling inwardly, but of course I
realize that the right answer to this problem is to be found
through that approach. I will try it faithfully, as difficult as it
may be." She smiled wanly, but the animus was gone.
From time to time I checked with my friends, and found that
while everything was not entirely as they desired, they
gradually became fairly contented under the new
arrangement. They were able to overcome their disappointment and ill will.
Bill even confided to me that he liked the new man and in a
way enjoyed working with him. He told me that the new
president often called him in for consultation and seemed to
lean on him.
Mary was nice to the president's wife, and in fact they went
to the fullest extent to be co-operative.
Two years passed. One day I arrived in their city and
telephoned them.
"Oh, I am so excited I can hardly speak," Mary said.
165
I commented that anything that could put her in that state
must be of unusual importance.
Ignoring this remark, she cried, "Oh, the most wonderful
thing has happened. Mr. So-and-So," naming the president,
"has been selected by another company at a big promotion
for a special job which will take him out of our organization
into a much better position and"—she posed the question—
"guess what? Bill has just been notified that he is now
president of this company. Come over right away and let the
three of us give thanks together."
Later, as we sat together, Bill said, "Do you know, I am
beginning to realize that Christianity isn't theoretical after all.
We have solved a problem according to well-defined
spiritually scientific principles. I shudder to think," he said,
"of the terrible mistake we would have made had we not
gone at this problem according to the formula contained in
the teachings of Jesus.
"Who in the world," he asked, "is responsible for the silly
idea that Christianity is impractical? Never again will I let a
problem come up without attacking it in just the way the
three of us solved this one."
Well, several years have passed, and Mary and Bill have had
other problems, and to each of them they have applied this
same technique, invariably with good results. By the "put it
in God's hands" method they have learned to solve their
problems right.
Another effective technique in problem solving is the simple
device of conceiving of God as a partner. One of the basic
truths taught by the Bible is that God is with us. In fact,
Christianity begins with that concept, for when Jesus Christ
was born He was called Immanuel, meaning "God with us."
Christianity teaches that in all the difficulties, problems, and
166
circumstances of this life God is close by. We can talk to
Him, lean upon Him, get help from Him, and have the
inestimable benefit of His interest, support, and help.
Practically everybody believes in a general way that this is
true, and many have experienced the reality of this faith.
In getting correct solutions to your problems, however, it is
necessary to go a step further than believing this, for one
must actually practice the idea of presence. Practice
believing that God is as real and actual as your wife, or your
business partner, or your closest friend. Practice talking
matters over with Him; believe that He hears and gives
thought to your problem. Assume that He impresses upon
your mind through consciousness the proper ideas and
insights necessary to solve your problems. Definitely believe
that in these solutions there will be no error, but that you will
be guided to actions according to truth which results in right
outcomes.
A businessman stopped me one day following a Rotary Club
meeting in a Western city at which I had made a speech. He
told me that something he had read in one of my newspaper
columns had, as he put it, "completely revolutionized his
attitude and saved his business."
Naturally I was interested and pleased that any little thing I
had said would bring about such a splendid result.
"I had been having quite a difficult time in my business," he
said. "In fact, it was beginning to be a very serious question
as to whether I could save my business. A series of
unfortunate circumstances together with market conditions,
regulatory procedures, and dislocations to the economy of
the country generally affected my line profoundly. I read this
article of yours in which you advanced the idea of taking
God in as a partner. I think you used the phrase, 'effect a
merger with God.'
167
"When I first read that it seemed to me a rather 'crackedbrain idea.' How could a man on earth, a human being, take
God as a partner? Besides, I had always thought of God as a
vast being, so much bigger than man that I was like an insect
in His sight, and yet you were saying that I should take Him
as a partner. The idea seemed preposterous. Then a friend
gave me one of your books and I found similar ideas
scattered all through it. You told actual life stories about
people who followed this advice. They all seemed to be
sensible people, but still I was unconvinced. I always had the
idea that ministers are idealistic theorists, that they know
nothing about business and practical affairs. So I sort of
'wrote you off,' " he said with a smile.
"However, a funny thing happened one day. I went to my
office so depressed that I actually thought perhaps the best
thing for me to do would be to blow my brains out and get
away from all these problems which seemed completely to
floor me. Then into my mind came this idea of taking God as
a partner. I shut the door, sat in my chair, and put my head
on my arms on the desk. I might as well confess to you that I
hadn't prayed more than a dozen times in as many years.
However, I certainly did pray on this occasion. I told the
Lord that I had heard this idea about taking Him in as a
partner, that I wasn't actually sure what it meant, or how one
did it. I told Him I was sunk, that I couldn't get any ideas
except panicky ones, that I was baffled, bewildered, and very
discouraged. I said, 'Lord, I can't offer You much in the way
of a partnership, but please join with me and help me. I don't
know how You can help me, but I want to be helped. So I
now put my business, myself, my family, and my future in
Your hands. Whatever You say goes. I don't even know how
You are going to tell me what to do, but I am ready to hear
and will follow Your advice if You will make it clear.'
"Well," he continued, "that was the prayer. After I finished
praying I sat at my desk. I guess I expected something
168
miraculous to happen, but nothing did. However, I did
suddenly feel quiet and rested. I actually had a feeling of
peacefulness. Nothing out of the ordinary occurred that day
nor that night, but next day when I went to my office I had a
brighter and happier feeling than usual. I began to feel
confident that things would turn out right. It was hard to
explain why I felt that way. Nothing was any different. In
fact, you might even say things were a shade worse, but I
was different, at least a little different.
This feeling of peacefulness stayed with me and I began to
feel better. I kept praying each day and talked to God as I
would to a partner. They were not church prayers—just plain
man-to-man talk. Then one day in my office, all of a sudden
an idea popped up in my mind. It was like toast popping up
in a toaster. I said to myself, 'Well, what do you know about
that?' for it was something that had never occurred to me, but
I knew instantly that it was just the method to follow. Why I
had never thought of it before I haven't the slightest idea. My
mind was too tied up, I guess. I hadn't been functioning
mentally.
"I immediately followed the hunch." Then he stopped. "No,
it was no hunch, it was my partner talking to me. I
immediately put this idea into operation and things began to
roll. New ideas began to flow out of my mind, and despite
conditions I began to get the business back on an even keel.
Now the general situation has improved considerably, and
I'm out of the woods."
Then he said, "I don't know anything about preaching or
about writing the kind of books you write, or any books for
that matter, but let me tell you this—whenever you get a
chance to talk to businessmen tell them that if they will take
God as a partner in their business they will get more good
ideas than they can ever use, and they can turn those ideas
into assets. I don't merely mean money," he said, "although a
169
way to get a good return on your investment, I believe, is to
get God-guided ideas. But tell them that the God-partnership
method is the way to get their problems solved right."
This incident is just one of many similar demonstrations of
the law of Divine-human relationship working itself out in
practical affairs. I cannot emphasize too strongly the
effectiveness of this technique of problem solving. It has
produced amazing results in the many cases coming under
my observation.
In the very necessary business of solving personal problems,
it is important, first of all, to realize that the power to solve
them is inherent within you. Second, it is necessary to work
out and actualize a plan. Spiritual and emotional planlessness
is a definite reason for the failure of many people to meet
their personal problems successfully.
A business executive told me that he puts his dependence
upon the "emergency powers of the human brain." It is his
theory, and a sound one, that a human being possesses extra
powers that may be tapped and utilized under emergency
situations. In the ordinary conduct of day-by-day living,
these emergency powers lie dormant, but under extraordinary
circumstances the personality is able, when called upon, to
deliver extra power if needed.
A person who develops a working faith does not allow these
powers to lie dormant, but in proportion to his faith brings
many of them into play in connection with normal activity.
This explains why some people demonstrate greater force
than others in daily requirements and in a crisis. They have
made it a habit normally to draw upon powers that would
otherwise be ignored except in some dramatic necessity.
When a difficult situation arises, do you know how to meet
it? Have you any clearly defined plan for solving unusually
difficult problems as they develop? Many people proceed on
170
a hit-or-miss method, and, sadly enough, most frequently
they miss. I cannot urge too strongly the importance of a
planned use of your greater powers in meeting problems.
In addition to the method of two or three praying together in
the "surrender of God" technique and that of establishing a
partnership with God and the importance of a plan to tap and
utilize emergency inner powers, there is still another
tremendous technique—that of practicing faith attitudes. I
read the Bible for years before it ever dawned on me that it
was trying to tell me that if I would have faith—and really
have it—that I could overcome all of my difficulties, meet
every situation, rise above every defeat, and solve all of the
perplexing problems of my life. The day that realization
dawned on me was one of the greatest, if not the greatest, of
my life. Undoubtedly many people will read this book who
have never gotten the faith idea of living. But I hope you will
get it now, for the faith technique is without question one of
the most powerful truths in the world having to do with the
successful conduct of human life.
Throughout the Bible the truth is emphasized again and
again that "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard
seed...nothing shall be impossible unto you." (Matthew
17:20) The Bible means this absolutely, factually,
completely, and literally. It isn't an illusion, it isn't a fantasy.
It is not an illustration, nor a symbol, nor a metaphor, but the
absolute fact—"Faith, even as a grain of mustard seed," will
solve your problems, any of your problems, all of your
problems, if you believe it and practice it. "According to
your faith, be it unto you." (Matthew 9:29) The requirement
is faith, and directly in proportion to the faith that you have
and use will you get results. Little faith gives you little
results, medium faith gives you medium results, great faith
gives you great results. But in the generosity of Almighty
God, if you have only the faith symbolized by a grain of
mustard seed, it will do amazing things in solving your
171
problems.
For example, let me tell you the thrilling story of my friends
Maurice and Mary Alice Flint. I became acquainted with
them when a previous book of mine, A Guide to Confident
Living, was condensed in Liberty magazine. Maurice Flint at
that time was failing, and failing badly. Not only was he
failing in his job, but as a person as well. He was filled with
fear and resentment and was one of the most negative
persons I have ever encountered. He was endowed with a
nice personality and at heart was a wonderful fellow, but he
had simply messed life up as he himself admitted.
He read the condensation of the book in which is emphasized
the idea of "mustard-seed faith." At this time he was living in
Philadelphia with his family, a wife and two sons. He
telephoned my church in New York, but for some reason did
not make contact with my secretary. I mention this to show
his already changing mental attitude for normally he would
never have called the second time, because it was his
pathetic habit to give up everything after a feeble effort, but
in this instance he persevered until he got through and
secured the information relative to the time of church
services. The next Sunday he drove from Philadelphia to
New York with his family to attend church, which he
continued to do even in the most inclement weather.
In an interview later he told me his life story in full detail
and asked if I thought he could ever make anything of
himself. The problems of money, of situations, of debts, of
the future, and primarily of himself were so complicated and
he was so overwhelmed with difficulty that he regarded the
situation as completely hopeless.
I assured him that if he would get himself personally
straightened out and get his mental attitudes attuned to God's
pattern of thought, and if he would learn and utilize the
technique of faith, all of his problems could be solved.
172
One attitude that both he and his wife had to clear out of
their minds was that of resentment. They were dully mad at
everybody and acutely so at some. They were in their present
unhappy condition, so they reasoned in their diseased
thoughts, not because of any failure on their part but because
of "dirty deals" other people had given them. They actually
used to lie in bed at night telling each other what they would
like to say to other people by way of insult. In this unhealthy
atmosphere they tried to find sleep and rest, but with no
successful result.
Maurice Flint really took to the faith idea. It gripped him as
nothing ever had. His reactions were weak, of course, for his
will power was disorganized. At first he was unable to think
with any power or force due to his long habit of negativism,
but he held on tenaciously, even desperately, to the idea that
if you have "faith as a grain of mustard seed, nothing is
impossible." With what force he did have he absorbed faith.
Of course, his capacity to have faith gradually increased as
he practiced it.
One night he went into the kitchen where his wife was
washing dishes. He said, "The faith idea is comparatively
easy on Sunday in church, but I can't hold it. It fades. I was
thinking that if I could carry a mustard seed in my pocket, I
could feel it when I began to weaken and that would help me
to have faith." He then asked his wife, "Do we have any of
those mustard seeds, or are they just something mentioned in
the Bible? Are there mustard seeds today?"
She laughed and said, "I have some right here in a pickle
jar."
She fished one out and gave it to him. "Don't you know,
Maurice," Mary Alice said, "that you don't need an actual
mustard seed. That is only the symbol of an idea."
"I don't know about that," he replied. "It says mustard seed in
173
the Bible and that's what I want. Maybe I need the symbol to
get faith."
He looked at it in the palm of his hand and said wonderingly,
"Is that all the faith I need—just a small amount like this tiny
grain of mustard seed?" He held it for a while and then put it
in his pocket, saying, "If I can just get my fingers on that
during the day, it will keep me working on this faith idea."
But the seed was so small he lost it, and he would go back to
the pickle jar for another one, only to lose it also. One day
when another seed became lost in his pocket, the idea came
to him, Why couldn't he put the grain of mustard seed in a
plastic ball? He could carry this ball in his pocket or put it on
his watch chain always to remind him that if he had "faith as
a grain of mustard seed, nothing would be impossible unto
him."
He consulted a supposed expert in plastics and asked how to
insert a mustard seed in a plastic ball so there would be no
bubble. The "expert" said it could not be done for the reason
that it had never been done, which of course was no reason at
all.
Flint had enough faith by this time to believe that if he had
faith "even as a grain of mustard seed" he could put a
mustard seed in a plastic sphere. He went to work, and kept
at it for weeks, and finally succeeded. He made up several
pieces of costume jewelry: necklace, bow pin, key chain,
bracelet, and sent them to me. They were beautiful, and on
each gleamed the translucent sphere with the mustard seed
within. With each one was a card which bore the title,
"Mustard Seed Remembrancer." The card also told how this
piece of jewelry could be used; how the mustard seed would
remind the wearer that "if he had faith, nothing was
impossible."
He asked me if I thought these articles could be
merchandised. I was no expert in such matters so I showed
174
them to Grace Oursler, consulting editor of Guideposts
magazine. She took the jewelry to our mutual friend, Mr.
Walter Hoving, president of Bonwit Teller Department
Store, one of the greatest executives in the country. He at
once saw the possibilities in this project. Imagine my
astonishment and delight when in the New York papers a
few days later was a two-column advertisement reading,
"Symbol of faith—a genuine mustard seed enclosed in
sparkling glass makes a bracelet with real meaning." And in
the advertisement was the Scripture passage, "If ye have faith
as a grain of mustard seed...nothing shall be impossible unto
you." (Matthew 17:20) These articles sold like hot cakes.
Now hundreds of great department stores and shops
throughout the country find difficulty keeping them in stock.
Mr. and Mrs. Flint have a factory in a Midwestern city
producing Mustard Seed Remembrancers. Curious, isn't it—a
failure goes to church and hears a text out of the Bible and
creates a great business. Perhaps you had better listen more
intently to the reading of the Bible and the sermon the next
time you go to church. Perhaps you, too, will get an idea that
will rebuild not only your life but your business as well.
Faith in this instance created a business for manufacturing
and distributing a product that has helped and will help
thousands upon thousands of people. So popular and
effective is it that others have copied it, but the Flint Mustard
Seed Remembrancer is the original. The story of the lives
that have been changed by this little device is one of the most
romantic spiritual stories of this generation. But the effect on
Maurice and Mary Alice Flint—the transformation of their
lives, the remaking of their characters, the releasing of their
personalities—this is a thrilling demonstration of faith
power. No longer are they negative—they are positive. No
more are they defeated—they are victorious. They no longer
hate. They have overcome resentment and their hearts are
filled with love. They are new people with a new outlook and
175
a new sense of power. They are two of the most inspiring
people I ever knew.
Ask Maurice and Mary Alice Flint how to get a problem
solved right. They will tell you—"Have faith—really have
faith." And believe me, they know.
If as you read this story you have said to yourself negatively
(and that is being negative), "The Flints were never so bad
off as I am," let me tell you that I have scarcely ever seen
anybody as badly off as were the Flints. And let me say
further that regardless of however desperate your situation
may be, if you will use the four techniques outlined in this
chapter, as did the Flints, you, too, can get your problem
solved right.
In this chapter I have tried to show various methods for
solving a problem. Now I wish to give ten simple
suggestions as a concrete technique to use generally in
solving your problems:
1. Believe that for every problem there is a solution.
2. Keep calm. Tension blocks the flow of thought power.
Your brain cannot operate efficiently under stress. Go at your
problem easy-like.
3. Don't try to force an answer. Keep your mind relaxed so
that the solution will open up and become clear.
4. Assemble all the facts impartially, impersonally, and
judicially.
5. List these fact on paper. This clarifies your thinking,
bringing the various elements into orderly system. You see
as well as think. The problem becomes objective, not
subjective.
6. Pray about your problem, affirming that God will flash
176
illumination into your mind.
7. Believe in and seek God's guidance on the promise of the
"3rd Psalm, "Thou wilt guide me by thy counsel."
8. Trust in the faculty of insight and intuition.
9. Go to church and let your subconscious work on the
problem as you attune to the mood of worship. Creative
spiritual thinking has amazing power to give "right" answers.
10. If you follow these steps faithfully, then the answer that
develops in your mind, or comes to pass, is the right answer
to your problem.

177
Chapter 11
How to Use Faith in Healing
IS RELIGIOUS FAITH a factor in healing? Important
evidence indicates that it is. There was a time in my own
experience when I was not convinced of this, but now I am,
and that very definitely. I have seen too many evidences to
believe otherwise.
We are learning that faith properly understood and applied is
a powerful factor in overcoming disease and establishing
health.
My conviction regarding this important question is shared by
many medical men. Newspapers carried an account of the
visit to this country of the famous Viennese surgeon, Dr.
Hans Finsterer. I quote the newspaper story which was
headed "Honor Surgeon 'Guided by God.' "
"A Viennese doctor, Dr. Hans Finsterer, who believes 'the
unseen hand of God' helps make an operation successful, was
selected by the International College of Surgeons for its
highest honor, 'master of surgery.' He was cited for his work
in abdominal surgery with the use of local anesthesia only.
"Finsterer, seventy-two-year-old professor at the University
of Vienna, has performed more than 20,000 major
operations, among them 8,000 gastric resections (removal of
part or all of the stomach) using only local anesthesia.
Finsterer said that although considerable progress has been
made in medicine and surgery in the past few years 'all
advances are not sufficient in themselves to insure a happy
outcome in every operation. In many instances,' he said, 'in
what appeared to be simple surgical procedures the patients
died, and in some cases where the surgeon despaired of a
patient there was recovery.
178
" 'Some of our colleagues attribute these things to
unpredictable chance, while others are convinced that in
those difficult cases their work has been aided by the unseen
hand of God. Of late years, unfortunately, many patients and
doctors have lost their conviction that all things depend on
the providence of God.
" 'When we are once again convinced of the importance of
God's help in our activities, and especially in the treatment of
our patients, then true progress will have been accomplished
in restoring the sick to health.' "
So concludes the account of a great surgeon who combines
his science with faith.
I spoke at the national convention of an important industry. It
was a large gathering of the leaders in an amazingly creative
merchandising enterprise that has established this particular
industry as a vital factor in American business life.
I was somewhat surprised when one of the leaders of this
organization at the convention luncheon where the
discussion centered around taxation, rising costs, and
business problems, turned to me and asked, "Do you believe
that faith can heal?"
"There are a good many well-authenticated examples on
record of people who have been healed by faith," I answered.
"Of course, I do not think we should depend on faith alone to
heal a physical ailment. I believe in the combination of God
and the doctor. This viewpoint takes advantage of medical
science and the science of faith, and both are elements in the
healing process."
"Let me tell you my story," the man continued. "A number of
year ago I had a malady that was diagnosed as osteoma of
the jaw, that is, a bone tumor on my jaw. The doctors told me
it was practically incurable. You can imagine how that
179
disturbed me. Desperately I sought for help. Although I had
attended church with fair regularity, still I was not a
particularly religious man. I scarcely ever read the Bible.
One day, however, as I lay in my bed it occurred to me that I
would like to read the Bible, and I asked my wife to bring
one to me. She was very surprised, for I have never before
made such a request.
"I began to read, and found consolation and comfort. I also
became a bit more hopeful and less discouraged. I continued
to read for extended periods every day. But that wasn't the
chief result. I began to notice that the condition which had
troubled me was growing less noticeable. At first I thought I
imagined this, then I became convinced that some change
was taking place in me.
"One day while reading the Bible I had a curious inward
feeling of warmth and great happiness. It is difficult to
describe, and long ago I got over trying to explain the
feeling. From that time on my improvement was more rapid.
I went back to the doctors who had first diagnosed my case.
They examined me carefully. They were obviously surprised
and agreed that my condition had improved, but warned me
that this was only a temporary respite. Later, however, upon
further examination, it was determined that the symptoms of
osteoma had disappeared entirely. Still the doctors told me it
would probably start all over again. This did not disturb me,
for in my heart I knew that I was healed."
"How long has it been since your healing?" I asked.
"Fourteen years," was the answer.
I studied this man. Strong, sturdy, healthy, he is one of the
outstanding men in his industry. The incident was told to me
in the factual way that a businessman would recount it. There
was not the slightest indication of doubt in this man's mind.
Indeed how could there be, for whereas he had been
180
condemned to death, here he was alive and vigorous.
What did it? The skillful work of the physician plus! And
what was the plus? Obviously the faith that heals.
The healing described by this gentleman is but one of many
similar accounts, and so many of them are attested by
competent medical evidence that it seems we must encourage
people to make greater use of the amazing power of faith in
healing. Sadly the healing element in faith has suffered
neglect. I am certain that faith can and does work what we
call "miracles" but which are, in truth, the operation of
spiritually scientific laws.
There is a growing emphasis in present-day religious practice
which is designed to help people find healing from the
sicknesses of mind, heart, soul, and body. This is a return to
the original practice of Christianity. Only in recent times
have we tended to overlook the fact that for centuries
religion carried on healing activities. The very word "pastor"
derives from a word meaning "the cure of souls." In modern
times, however, man made the false assumption that it is
impossible to harmonize the teachings of the Bible with what
is called "science" and so the healing emphasis of religion
was abandoned almost entirely to materialistic science.
Today, however, the close association of religion and health
is increasingly recognized.
It is significant that the word "holiness" derives from a word
meaning "wholeness" and the word "meditation," usually
used in a religious sense, closely resembles the root meaning
of the word "medication." The affinity of the two words is
startlingly evident when we realize that sincere and practical
meditation upon God and His truth acts as a medication for
the soul and body.
Present-day medicine emphasizes psychosomatic factors in
healing, thus recognizing the relationship of mental states to
181
bodily health. Modern medical practice realizes and takes
into consideration the close connection between how a man
thinks and how he feels. Since religion deals with thought
and feeling and basic attitudes, it is only natural that the
science of faith should be important in the healing process.
Harold Sherman, author and playwright, was asked to revise
an important radio presentation with the promise that he
would be contracted as the permanent writer. After some
months of work, he was dismissed and his material used
without credit. This resulted in financial difficulty and
humiliation. The injustice rankling in his mind developed
into a growing bitterness against the radio executive who had
broken faith with him. Mr. Sherman declares that this is the
one time in his life when he had murder in his heart. His
hatred made him subject to a physical affliction in the form
of a mycosis, a fungus growth which attacked the
membranes of his throat. The best medical attention was
secured, but something in addition was required. When he
gave up his hate and developed a feeling of forgiveness and
understanding, the condition gradually corrected itself. With
the aid of medical science and a new mental attitude, he was
healed of his affliction.
A sensible and effective pattern for health and happiness is to
utilize the skills and methods of medical science to the fullest
possible extent and at the same time apply the wisdom, the
experience, and the techniques of spiritual science. There is
impressive evidence to support the belief that God works
through both the practitioner of science, the doctor, and the
practitioner of faith, the minister. Many physicians join in
this point of view.
At a Rotary Club luncheon I sat at a table with nine other
men, one of them a physician who had recently been
discharged from military service and had resumed his
civilian practice. He said,
182
"Upon my return from the Army, I noticed a change in my
patients' troubles. I found that a high percentage do not need
medicine but better thought patterns. They are not sick in
their bodies so much as they are sick in their thoughts and
emotions. They are all mixed up with fear thoughts,
inferiority feelings, guilt, and resentment. I found that in
treating them I needed to be about as much a psychiatrist as a
physician, and then I discovered that not even those therapies
helped me fully to do my job. I became aware that in many
cases the basic trouble with people was spiritual. So I found
myself frequently quoting the Bible to them. Then I fell into
the habit of 'prescribing' religious and inspirational books,
especially those that give guidance in how to live."
Directing his statements to me, he said, "It's about time you
ministers began to realize that in the healing of many people
you, too, have a function to perform. Of course you are not
going to overlap on the work of the physician any more than
we shall intrude on your function, but we doctors need the
co-operation of ministers in helping people find health and
well-being."
I received a letter from a physician in an upstate New York
town who said, "Sixty percent of the people in this town are
sick because they are maladjusted in their minds and in their
souls. It is hard to realize that the modern soul is sick to such
an extent that the physical organs pain. I suppose in time,"
continues the doctor, "that ministers, priests, and rabbis will
understand this relationship."
This physician was kind enough to say that he prescribes my
book, A Guide to Confident Living, and other similar books
to his patients and that noteworthy results have been
achieved thereby.
The manager of a Birmingham, Alabama, bookstore sent me
a prescription form made out by a physician of that city to be
filled not at a drugstore, but at her bookstore. He prescribes
183
specific books for specific troubles.
Dr. Carl R. Ferris, formerly president of the Jackson County
Medical Society of Kansas City, Missouri, with whom I had
the pleasure of appearing on a joint health-and-happiness
radio program, declared that in treating human ills the
physical and spiritual are often so deeply interrelated that
there is often no clearly defined dividing line between the
two.
Years ago my friend, Dr. Clarence W. Lieb, pointed out to
me the effect on health of spiritual and psychiatric problems,
and through his wise guidance I began to see that fear and
guilt, hate and resentment, problems with which I was
dealing, were often closely connected with problems of
health and physical well-being. So profoundly does Dr. Lieb
believe in this therapy that he with Dr. Smiley Blanton
inaugurated the religio-psychiatric clinic which for years has
ministered to hundreds at the Marble Collegiate Church in
New York.
The late Dr. William Seaman Bainbridge and I worked
closely together m the relationship of religion and surgery,
and we were able to bring health and new life to many.
Two of my medical friends in New York, Dr. Z. Taylor
Bercovitz and Dr. Howard Westcott, have been of
inestimable help in my pastoral work through their wisely
scientific and yet deeply spiritual understanding of the ills of
the body, mind, and soul as related to faith.
"We have discovered the psychosomatic cause of high blood
pressure as some form of subtle, repressed fear—a fear of
things that might happen, not of things that are," says Dr.
Rebecca Beard. "They are largely fears of things in the
future. In that sense, therefore, they are imaginary, for they
may never happen at all. In the case of diabetes, it is grief or
disappointment which we found uses up more energy than
184
any other emotion, thereby exhausting the insulin which is
manufactured by the pancreas cells until they are worn out.
"Here we find the emotions involved in the past—reliving
the past and not being able to go forward into life. The
medical world can give relief in disorders like these. They
can give something that can lower the blood pressure when it
is high, or raise it when it is low, but not permanently. They
can give insulin which will burn up more sugar into energy
and give the diabetic relief. These are definite aids, but they
do not offer complete cure. No drug or vaccine has been
discovered to protect us from our own emotional conflicts. A
better understanding of our own emotional selves and a
return to religious faith seem to form the combination that
holds the greatest promise of permanent help to any of us.
"The answer," Dr. Beard concludes, "is in the healing
teachings of Jesus."
Another efficient woman physician wrote me of her own
development in combining the therapy of medicine and faith.
"I became interested in your straightforward religious
philosophy. I had been working at top speed and getting
tense, irritable, and at times beset with old fears and guilts, in
fact in need of a release from morbid tension. At a low
moment early one morning I picked up your book and began
to read it. This was the prescription that I needed. Here was
God, the great Physician, with faith in Him as an antibiotic to
kill the germs of fear and render useless the virus of guilt.
"I began to practice the good Christian principles outlined in
your book. Gradually there came a release of tension and I
felt relaxed and happier and I slept well. I quit taking vitamin
and pep pills. Then," she adds, and this is what I want to
emphasize, "I began to feel that I wanted to share this new
experience with my patients, those who came to me with
neuroses. I was surprised to find how many had read your
book and others. The patient and I seemed to have a common
185
ground to work on. It has been an enriching experience. To
talk about a faith in God has become a natural and easy thing
to do.
"As a doctor," she adds, "I have seen a number of miraculous
recoveries due to Divine aid being given. In the past few
weeks I have had an additional experience. My sister had to
undergo a serious operation about three weeks ago.
Following the operation she developed an intestinal
obstruction. On her fifth day she was very critically ill, and
as I left the hospital at noon I realized that she must take a
turn for the better very soon or her hope of recovery would
be slim. I was very worried, so I drove slowly around for
about twenty minutes praying for a relief of this obstruction.
(Everything that could be done medically was being taken
care of.) I had not been home more than ten minutes when
the phone rang and her nurse told me that the obstruction had
relieved itself and that she had taken a definite turn for the
better, and since that time she has recovered completely.
Could I feel otherwise than that God's intervention had saved
her life?"
So runs the letter of a successful practicing physician.
In the light of this viewpoint based on a strictly
commonsense scientific attitude we may approach the
phenomenon of healing through faith with credibility. If I did
not believe sincerely that the faith factor in healing is sound I
would certainly not develop the point of view contained in
this chapter.
Over a period of time I have received from many readers and
radio listeners as well as from my own parishioners accounts
of healings in which the element of faith has been present. I
have meticulously investigated many of these to satisfy my
own mind as to their truthfulness. Also I wanted to be able to
declare to the most cynical that here is a way of health,
happiness, and successful living which is so buttressed by
186
evidence that only the person who wants to remain ill
because of some subconscious will-to-fail attitude will
ignore his possibilities for health implied in these
experiences.
The formula which these many incidents together present is
briefly stated—the employment of all the resources of
medical and psychological science combined with the
resources of spiritual science. This is a combination of
therapies that can surely bring health and well-being if it is
the plan of God for the patient to live. Obviously for each of
us there comes a time for this mortal life to end (life itself
never ends, only the earthly phase of it).
We in the so-called old-line churches have, in my humble
judgment, missed one of our greatest possible contributions
by failing to point out with positiveness that there is a sound
message of health in Christianity. Failing to find this
emphasis in the church, groups, organizations, and other
spiritual bodies have been created to supply this deficiency
in Christian teaching. But there is no longer any valid reason
why all the churches should not recognize that which is
authenticated, namely, that there is healing in faith and more
generally offer sound healing techniques to our people.
Fortunately everywhere today throughout our religious
organizations thoughtful, scientifically minded spiritual
leaders are taking that extra step of faith based on the facts
(and the Scripture) and are making available to the people as
never before the formulas of the marvelous healing grace of
Jesus Christ.
In all of the investigations I have made into successful cases
of healing, there seem to be certain factors present. First, a
complete willingness to surrender oneself into the hands of
God. Second, a complete letting go of all error such as sin in
any form and a desire to be cleansed in the soul. Third, belief
and faith in the combined therapy of medical science in
187
harmony with the healing power of God. Fourth, a sincere
willingness to accept God's answer, whatever it may be, and
no irritation or bitterness against His will. Fifth, a substantial,
unquestioning faith that God can heal.
In all these healings there seems to be an emphasis upon
warmth and light and a feeling of assurance that power has
passed through. In practically every case that I have
examined, in one form or another, the patient talks about a
moment when there was warmth, heat, beauty, peace, joy,
and a sense of release. Sometimes it has been a sudden
experience; other times a more gradual unfolding of the
conviction that the healing has occurred.
Always in my investigation of these matters I have waited
for elapsed time to prove that the healing is permanent and
those cases which I report are not based on any temporary
improvement which might conceivably be the result of a
momentary resurgence of strength.
For example, may I relate a healing experience written for
me by a woman whose reliability and judgment I profoundly
respect. Documentation in this case is thoroughgoing and
scientifically impressive. This woman was told that an
immediate operation was necessary to remove a growth
which had been diagnosed as malignant.
I quote her exact words: "All precautionary treatments were
taken, but the manifestations returned. As may be expected, I
was terrified; I knew further hospital treatments were futile.
There was no hope, so I turned to God for help. A very
consecrated and spiritual child of God helped me by prayer
to realize that the right knowledge of God and His healing
Christ would help me too. I was most receptive to this kind
of thinking, and placed myself in God's hands.
"I had asked for this help one morning, as usual, and spent
the day going about my household duties, which were many
188
at that time. I was preparing the evening meal, all alone in
the kitchen. I was aware of an unusually bright light in the
room and felt a pressure against my whole left side, as
though a person were standing very close beside me. I had
heard of healings; I knew prayers were being offered in my
behalf, so I decided this must be the healing Christ who was
with me.
"I decided to wait until morning, to be sure; if the symptoms
of the trouble were gone, then I would know. By morning,
the improvement was so noticeable, and I was so free in my
mind, that I was certain, and reported to my friend that the
healing had taken place.
"The memory of that healing and the presence of Christ are
as fresh in my mind today as then. That was fifteen years
ago, and my health steadily improved until I am in excellent
condition now."
In many heart cases the therapy of faith (a quiet, serene faith
in Jesus Christ) undoubtedly stimulates healing. People who
experience "a heart attack" who thereupon thoroughly and
completely practice faith in Christ's healing grace, observing
at the same time the rules prescribed by their physicians,
report remarkable recovery histories. Perhaps such a person
may even gain a greater degree of health than previously for
having learned his limitations and, realizing the excess
strains he has been placing upon himself, now conserves his
strength.
But more than that he has learned one of the greatest
techniques of human well-being, that of surrendering himself
to the recuperative power of God. This is done by
consciously attaching himself to the creative process through
mentally conceiving of recreative forces as operating within
himself. The patient opens his consciousness to the tides of
vitality and re-creative energy inherent in the universe which
have been barred from his life through tension, high
189
pressure, and other departures from the laws of well-being.
An outstanding man suffered a heart attack about thirty-five
years ago. He was told that he would never be able to work
again. The orders were that he must spend much of his time
in bed. He would likely be an invalid the remainder of his
days, which days would be relatively few in number, so he
was informed. It is doubtful whether such statements would
be made to him in present-day medical practice. At any rate
he listened to these dire prophecies about his future and
considered them carefully.
One morning he awakened early and picked up his Bible and
by chance (or was it chance?) opened it to the account of one
of the healings of Jesus. He also read the statement, "Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, and today and forever." (Hebrews
13:8) It occurred to him that if Jesus could and did heal
people long ago, and that if He is the same as He was then,
why couldn't He heal today? "Why cannot Jesus heal me?"
he asked. Then faith welled up within him.
Therefore, with simple confidence, he asked the Lord to heal
him. He seemed to hear Jesus say, "Believest thou that I can
do this?" And his answer was, "Yes, Lord, I believe that You
can."
He closed his eyes and "seemed to feel the touch of the
healing Christ upon his heart." All that day he had a strange
sense of rest. As the days passed he became convinced that
there was a rising tide of strength within him. Finally one
day he prayed, "Lord, if it is Your will, tomorrow morning I
am going to get dressed, go outside, and within a few days I
am going back to work. I put myself completely in Your
care. If I should die tomorrow as a result of the increased
activity, I want to thank You for all the wonderful days I
have had. With You to help me, I shall start out tomorrow
and You will be with me all day long. I believe I will have
sufficient strength, but if I should die as a result of this effort,
190
I will be with You in eternity, and all will be well in either
case."
In this calm faith he increased his activities as the days
passed. He followed this formula every day for the entire
period of his active career, which numbered thirty years from
the date of his heart attack. He retired at seventy-five. Few
men I have known have been more vigorous in their
undertakings or have made a greater contribution to human
welfare. Always, however, he conserved his physical and
nervous strength. It was invariably his habit to lie down and
rest after lunch, and he never allowed himself to get under
stress. He was early to bed and early up, always employing
rigorous and disciplinary rules of living.
In all his activities there was an absence of worry,
resentment, and tension. He worked hard but easily.
The doctors were right. Had he continued according to the
debilitating habits of his earlier life he would probably have
long since been dead or at least an invalid. The advice of the
physicians brought him to the point where the healing work
of Christ could be accomplished. Without the heart attack he
would not have been mentally or spiritually ready for
healing.
Another friend of mine, a prominent businessman, suffered a
heart attack. For weeks he was confined to his bed, but
presently returned to his important responsibilities where he
now accomplishes all that he ever did previously, but with
much less tension. He seems to possess a new power that he
did not enjoy before. His recovery proceeded from a definite
and scientific spiritual approach to his health problem. He
had competent physicians and followed their directions
explicitly, which is an important factor in such situations.
In addition to the program of medication and treatment,
however, he worked out a spiritual healing formula. He
191
outlined it as follows, writing from the hospital, "An intimate
friend of mine, only twenty-five years old, was brought into
the hospital with an attack similar to mine and died within
four hours. Two acquaintances of mine have suffered a
similar fate in rooms near by. It must be that I have work yet
to do. So I shall return and apply myself to the tasks before
me with the expectation of living longer and more
abundantly than I might have done without this experience.
The doctors were wonderful, the nurses grand, the hospital
ideal."
He then proceeds to outline the technique of spiritual
convalescence which he employed. The formula consists of
three parts. "(1) During the first stages, when absolute rest
was demanded, I heeded the admonition of the Psalmist, 'Be
still and know that I am God.' " (Psalm 46:10) That is to say,
he completely relaxed and rested in the hands of God. "(2)
As the days grew brighter, I used the affirmation, 'Wait on
the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine
heart.' " (Psalm 27:14) The patient put his heart under the
care of God and God placed His hand of healing upon his
heart and renewed it. "(3) Finally with the return of strength
came a new assurance and confidence to which I gave
expression in the affirmation, 'I can do all things through
Christ which strengtheneth me.' " (Philippians 4:13) In this
he affirmed positively that strength was being conferred
upon him and in so doing he received new power.
In this three-point formula this man found healing. The able
ministrations of his physicians conserved and stimulated the
healing forces of his physical being. The equally wise
application of faith completed his recovery by stimulating
the spiritual powers within his nature. The two therapies
together draw upon the two great renewal forces within our
life, one the recuperative power of the human body and the
other the restorative forces resident within the mind. One
responds to medical treatment, the other to faith treatment,
192
and God presides in both areas. He made both body and
mind and He established the processes of health and wellbeing governing both. "...In Him we live and move and have
our being." (Acts 17:28)
In the prevention of sickness and in healing mind and body,
do not fail to draw upon one of the greatest resources
available to you—the faith that heals.
In the light of the principles outlined in this chapter, what
can you do of a constructive nature when a loved one or you
are ill? Following are eight practical suggestions:
1. Follow the advice of a prominent medical school head
who said, "In sickness, send for your minister even as you
send for your doctor." In other words, believe that spiritual
forces as well as medical technique are important in healing.
2. Pray for the doctor. Realize that God uses trained human
instrumentality to aid His healing powers. As one doctor has
put it, "We treat the patient and God heals him." Pray,
therefore, that the doctor may be an open channel of God's
healing grace.
3. Whatever you do, do not become panicky or filled with
fear, for if you do, you will send out negative thoughts and
therefore destructive thoughts in the direction of your loved
one when he requires positive and healing thoughts to assist
him.
4. Remember that God does nothing except by law. Also
remember that our little materialistic laws are only
fragmentary revelations of the great power flowing through
the universe.
Spiritual law also governs illness. God has arranged two
remedies for all illness. One is healing through natural laws
applicable by science, and the other brings healing by
193
spiritual law applicable through faith.
5. Completely surrender your loved one into the hands of
God. By your faith you can place him in the flow of Divine
power. There is healing there, but in order for it to be
effective the patient must be completely released to the
operation of God's will. This is difficult to understand and
equally difficult to perform, but it is a fact that if the great
desire for the loved one to live is matched with an equally
great willingness to relinquish him to God, healing powers
are amazingly set in motion.
6. It is also important that harmony prevail in the family, that
is, a spiritual harmony. Remember the emphasis in the
scripture, Matthew 18:19: "If two of you shall agree on earth
as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for
them of my Father which is in heaven." Apparently
disharmony and disease are akin.
7. Form a picture in your mind of the loved one as being
well. Visualize him in perfect health. Picture him as radiant
with the love and goodness of God. The conscious mind may
suggest sickness, even death, but nine tenths of your mind is
in the subconscious. Let the picture of health sink into the
subconscious and this powerful part of your mind will send
forth radiant health energy. What we believe in the
subconscious we usually get. Unless your faith controls the
subconscious, you will never get any good thing, for the
subconscious gives back only that which you real thought is.
If the real thought is negative, the results will also be
negative. If the real thought is positive, you will get positive
and healing results.
8. Be perfectly natural. Ask God to heal your loved one. That
is what you want with all your heart, so ask Him please to do
it, but we suggest that you say PLEASE just once. Thereafter
in your prayer, thank Him for His goodness. This affirmative
faith will help to release deep spiritual power and also joy
194
through reassurance of God's loving care. This joy will
sustain you, and remember that joy itself possesses healing
power.

195
Chapter 12
When Vitality Sags, Try This Health Formula
A WOMAN, SO I have heard, went into a drugstore and
asked for a bottle of psychosomatic medicine.
Such medicine, of course, is not found on drugstore shelves
for it does not come in pills or bottles. But there is a
psychosomatic medicine just the same and many of us need
it. It is a prescription compounded of prayer, faith, and
dynamic spiritual thinking.
It has been variously computed that from 50 to 75 percent of
present-day people are ill because of the influence of
improper mental states on their emotional and physical
make-up. Therefore such a medicine is of great importance.
Many people who are below par will find that there is a
health formula which, in addition to the services of their
physicians, can be of great value to them.
The manner in which spiritual and emotional treatment can
restore declining vitality is illustrated by the sales manager
referred to us by the head of a large company. This sales
executive, formerly a man of outstanding efficiency and
energetic driving power, experienced a serious decline both
in ability and energy. He lost his creative skill. Previously his
sales ideas had been unique and outstanding. It soon become
noticeable to his associates that this sales manager was
slipping badly. He was urged to consult a doctor, and the
company sent him to Atlantic City for a rest and later to
Florida for a second attempt at recovery. Neither of these
vacations seemed to be productive of any definite
improvement.
His physician, who knew about our religio-psychiatric clinic,
recommended to the company president that this sales
196
manager come to us for an interview. The president asked
him to come, which he did, but he was rather indignant at
being sent to a church.
"This is a pretty pass," he fumed, "when they send a
businessman to a preacher. I suppose you are going to pray
with me and read the Bible," he said irritably.
"I wouldn't be surprised," I answered, "for sometimes our
trouble lies in an area where prayer and the therapy of the
Bible can have an important effect."
He proved most sullen and unco-operative until finally I was
forced to say to him, "I want to tell you bluntly that you had
better co-operate with us or you're going to be fired."
"Who told you that?" he demanded.
"Your boss," I replied. "In fact, he says that unless we can
straighten you out, as much as he regrets it, you are going to
be through."
You never saw such a stunned expression on anybody's face.
"What do you think I ought to do?" he stammered.
"Often," I replied, "a person gets into the state in which you
find yourself because the mind is filled with fear, anxiety,
tension, resentment, guilt, or a combination of all of them.
When these emotional impediments accumulate to a certain
weight, the personality cannot support them any longer and
gives way. Normal sources of emotional, spiritual, and
intellectual power become clogged up. So a person becomes
bogged down by resentment, by fear, or by guilt. I do not
know your trouble, but I would suggest that you think of me
as a sympathetic friend with whom you can be absolutely
confident, and that you tell me about yourself." I emphasized
that it was important he conceal nothing and that he
completely empty himself of whatever fears, resentments, or
197
guilt feelings might be in his mind. "I assure you that our
interview will be held in strictest confidence. All your
company wants is to have you back, the same highly
efficient person you were."
In due course the trouble came out. He had committed a
series of sins and these had involved him in a complicated
maze of lies. He was living in fear of exposure, and all in all
it was a most pathetic mass of inner confusion. It came little
short of mental filth.
It was rather difficult to get him to talk, for he was
essentially a decent person and had a strong sense of shame.
I told him that I understood his reticence, but that this
operation had to be performed and that it could not be
accomplished without a thorough mind-emptying.
When it was all over, I shall never forget the manner in
which he reacted. Standing on his feet he began to stretch.
He stood on tiptoes, reaching his fingers toward the ceiling,
and then took a deep breath. "My," he said, "I feel good." It
was a dramatic expression of release and relief. Then I
suggested that he pray and ask God to forgive him and to fill
him with peace and cleanness.
"Do you mean for me to pray aloud?" he asked dubiously. "I
never did that in my life."
"Yes," I said, "it is a good practice and will strengthen you."
It was a simple prayer, and as best as I can recall it, this is
what he said, "Dear Lord, I have been an unclean man and I
am sorry for the wrong I have done. I have poured it all out
to my friend here. I now ask You to forgive me and to fill me
with peace. Also make me strong so that I will never repeat
these actions. Help me to be clean again and better—lots
better."
198
He went back to his office that very day. Nothing was ever
said to him, and it did not need to be, for soon he got back
into stride and is one of the best sales managers in his city
today.
Later I met his president, who said, "I don't know what you
did to Bill, but he is certainly a ball of fire."
"I did nothing. God did it," I replied.
"Yes," he said, "I understand. Anyway, he is the old-time
Bill."
When this man's vitality sagged, he tried a health formula
that restored him to normal efficiency. He "took" some
psychosomatic medicine which cured him of an unhealthy
spiritual and mental condition.
Dr. Franklin Ebaugh of the University of Colorado Medical
School maintains that one third of all cases of illness in
general hospitals are clearly organic in nature and onset, one
third are a combination of emotional and organic, and one
third are clearly emotional.
Dr. Flanders Dunbar, author of Mind and Body, says, "It is
not a question of whether an illness is physical or emotional,
but how much of each."
Every thoughtful person who has ever considered the matter
realizes that the doctors are right when they tell us that
resentment, hate, grudge, ill will, jealousy, vindictiveness,
are attitudes which produce ill-health. Have a fit of anger and
experience for yourself that sinking feeling in the pit of your
stomach, that sense of stomach sickness. Chemical reactions
in the body are set up by emotional outbursts that result in
feelings of ill-health. Should these be continued either
violently or in a simmering state over a period of time, the
general condition of the body will deteriorate.
199
In speaking of a certain man whom we both knew a
physician told me that the patient died of "grudgitis." The
physician actually felt that the deceased passed away because
of a long-held hatred. "He did his body such damage that his
resistance was lowered," the doctor explained, "so that when
a physical malady attacked him he did not possess the
stamina or renewing force to overcome it. He had
undermined himself physically by the malignancy of his ill
will."
Dr. Charles Miner Cooper, San Francisco physician, in an
article entitled, "Heart-to-Heart Advice About Heart
Trouble," says, "You must curb your emotional reactions.
When I tell you that I have known a patient's blood pressure
to jump sixty points almost instantaneously in response to an
outburst of anger, you can understand what strain such
reactions can throw upon the heart." One who is "quick on
the trigger," he wrote, is likely to blame someone else,
impulsively, for a fault or mistake, when it would be wiser
simply to avoid being so much disturbed by what is done and
is therefore unavoidable. He quoted the great Scottish
surgeon, John Hunter. Dr. Hunter had a heart condition
himself, and a thorough understanding of the effect of strong
emotion on his heart. He said that his life was at the mercy of
anyone who could annoy him. And, in fact, his death resulted
from a heart attack caused by a fit of anger when he forgot to
discipline himself.
Dr. Cooper concludes, "Whenever a business problem starts
to vex you or you begin to get angry, let yourself go limp all
over. This will dissipate your mounting inner turmoil. Your
heart asks that it be permanently housed in a lean, cheerful,
placid man who will intelligently curb his physical, mental,
and emotional activities."
So if you are under par I suggest that you do a very
scrupulous job of self-analysis. Honestly ask yourself if you
200
are harboring any ill will or resentment or grudges, and if so
cast them out. Get rid of them without delay. They do not
hurt anybody else. They do no harm to the person against
whom you hold these feelings, but every day and every night
of your life they are eating at you. Many people suffer poor
health not because of what they eat but from what is eating
them. Emotional ills turn in upon yourself, sapping your
energy, reducing your efficiency, causing deterioration in
your health. And of course they siphon off your happiness.
So we realize today the effect of thought patterns upon
physical states. We realize that a person can make himself ill
by resentment. We know he can develop various kinds of
physiological symptoms because of a sense of guilt. Also one
may show definite physical symptoms as a result of fear and
anxiety. We know that healing has been accomplished when
the thoughts are changed.
Recently a diagnostician told me of a young woman who was
admitted to the hospital with a temperature of one hundred
and two degrees. She had a definite case of rheumatoid
arthritis; her joints were badly swollen.
In order to study the case thoroughly the doctor gave her no
medication except a slight sedative to relieve the pain. After
two days the young woman asked the doctor, "How long will
I be in this condition, and how long must I remain in the
hospital?"
"I think I must tell you," replied the physician, "that you will
probably be in the hospital for about six months."
"You mean it will be six months before I can get married?"
she demanded.
"I am sorry," he said, "but I cannot promise you anything
better than that."
201
This conversation took place in the evening. The next
morning the patient's temperature was normal and the
swelling was gone from her joints. Unable to account for the
change, the doctor observed her for a few days, then sent her
home.
In a month she was back in the hospital in the same condition
as before: temperature one hundred and two, joints swollen.
Counseling disclosed that her father insisted that she marry a
certain man who would be an asset to him in his business
connections. The girl loved her father, wanted to do as he
wished, but did not want to marry a man whom she did not
love. So her subconscious mind came to her assistance and in
effect gave her rheumatoid arthritis and a temperature.
The doctor explained to the father that if he forced this
marriage his daughter could become an invalid. When told
that she need not go through with the marriage, the girl's
recovery was quick and permanent.
Do not get the idea that if you have arthritis you are married
to the wrong person! This incident merely illustrates the
profound effect of mental pain on physical conditions.
I was interested to read a statement by a psychologist that
infants can "catch" fear and hatred from people around them
more quickly than they can catch measles or other infectious
diseases. The virus of fear may burrow deeply into their
subconsciousness and remain there for a lifetime. "But," adds
the psychologist, "fortunately infants can also catch love and
goodness and faith and so grow up to become normal,
healthy children and adults."
In an article in the Ladies' Home Journal, Constance J.
Foster quotes Dr. Edward Weiss of Temple University
Medical School in a speech to the American College of
Physicians in which Dr. Weiss stated that chronic victims of
202
pains and aches in the muscles and joints may be suffering
from nursing a smoldering grudge against someone close to
them. He added that such persons usually are totally unaware
that they bear a chronic resentment.
"To clear up any possible misunderstanding," the author
continues, "it is necessary to state emphatically that emotions
and feelings are quite as real as germs and no less
respectable. The resultant pain and suffering of diseases
caused primarily by the emotions are no more imaginary
than those caused by bacteria. In no case is the patient
consciously to blame for developing the disease. Such
persons are not suffering from any disease of the mind, but
rather from a disorder of their feelings, often linked to a
marital or parent-child problem."
In this same magazine article the story is told of a certain
Mrs. X who came to the doctor's office complaining of a
breaking out on her hands which was diagnosed as eczema.
The doctor encouraged Mrs. X to talk about herself. It
developed that she was a very rigid person. Her lips were
thin and unyielding. She was also rheumatoid. The doctor
sent Mrs. X to a psychiatrist who saw at once that there was
some irritating situation in her life which she was translating
outwardly in the form of a skin rash, thus taking out on her
own person the urge to scratch some thing or person.
The doctor finally put it to her bluntly. "What is eating you?"
he asked. "You're peeved at something, aren't you?"
"She stiffened up like a ramrod and marched right out of the
office, so I knew I'd hit the target too closely for comfort. A
few days later she came back. Due to the agony of the
eczema, she was ready to let me help her even if it meant she
had to give up a hate.
"It turned out to be a family row over a will with Mrs. X
feeling she had been treated unfairly by a younger brother.
203
When she got rid of the hostility, she got well, and when she
made up the quarrel with her brother, within twenty-four
hours the eczema vanished."
That there is even a relationship between emotional
disturbance and the common cold is indicated by Dr. L. J.
Saul of the University of Pennsylvania Medical School, who
has made a study of this subject.
"Emotional disturbances are believed to affect the blood
circulation in the linings of the nose and throat. They also
affect glandular secretions. These factors make the mucous
membranes more susceptible to attack by cold viruses or
germ infection."
Dr. Edmund P. Fowler, Jr., of Columbia University's College
of Physicians and Surgeons, stated, "There are colds which
develop in medical students at the time of their examinations
and colds which develop in many persons before or after a
trip. Colds develop in housewives when they must care for a
large family. And one often sees a cold develop in a patient
when his mother-in-law comes to live in the house, and it
often disappears when she leaves." (Dr. Fowler does not
specify the effects on the mother-in-law of a daughter-in-law
or son-in-law. Perhaps she has a cold also.)
One of the cases Dr. Fowler reports concerned a twenty-fiveyear-old salesgirl. When she visited his office her nose was
stuffy, the lining was red and congested, and she suffered
from a headache and a mild temperature. These symptoms
had persisted for nearly two weeks. Questioning disclosed
that they had started a few hours after a violent quarrel with
her fiancé.
Local treatments cleared up the cold but the young woman
was back in a few weeks with another attack. This time the
trouble had started after an argument with the butcher. Again
local treatments brought relief. But the girl continued to have
204
recurring colds, and each time they were traced to a fit of
anger. Finally Dr. Fowler was able to persuade the girl that
her bad temper was at the root of her chronic cold symptoms.
When she learned to lead a calmer existence, her sneezes and
sniffles disappeared.
And yet people still think that when the Bible tells you not to
hate or to get angry that it is "theoretical advice." The Bible
is not theoretical. It is our greatest book of wisdom. It is
filled with practical advice on living and on health. Anger,
resentment, and guilt make you sick, modern physicians tell
us, which proves once again that the most up-to-date book on
personal well-being is the Holy Bible, neglected by so many
or regarded by them as purely a religious book and certainly
as one that is not practical. No wonder more copies are read
than all other books. That is because in this book we discover
not only what is wrong with us but how to correct it as well.
Dr. Fowler calls attention to the "emotional colds" suffered
by children who feel insecure. He reports that many cases of
chronic colds occur in children who come from broken
homes. An older child often has recurring respiratory
infection when a new baby is born because he feels neglected
and jealous. A nine-year-old boy had an extremely dictatorial
father and an indulgent mother. The conflict between the
strictness of one parent and the lenience of the other
obviously was disturbing to the child. He particularly feared
punishment by his father. This boy suffered for several years
from continuous coughs and sniffles. It was noted that the
colds disappeared when he went to camp—away from his
parents.
Since irritation, anger, hate, and resentment have such a
powerful effect in producing ill-health, what is the antidote?
Obviously it is to fill the mind with attitudes of good will,
forgiveness, faith, love, and the spirit of imperturbability.
And how is that accomplished? Following are some practical
205
suggestions. They have been used successfully by many in
counterattacking especially the emotion of anger. A
consistent application of these suggestions can produce
feelings of well-being:
1. Remember that anger is an emotion, and an emotion is
always warm, even hot. Therefore to reduce an emotion, cool
it. And how do you cool it? When a person gets angry, the
fists tend to clench, the voice rises in stridency, muscles
tense, the body becomes rigid. (Psychologically you are
poised for fight, adrenaline shoots through the body.) This is
the old caveman hangover in the nervous system. So
deliberately oppose the heat of this emotion with coolness—
freeze it out. Deliberately, by an act of will, keep your hands
from clenching. Hold your fingers out straight. Deliberately
reduce your tone; bring it down to a whisper. Remember that
it is difficult to argue in a whisper. Slump in a chair, or even
lie down if possible. It is very difficult to get mad lying
down.
2. Say aloud to yourself, "Don't be a fool. This won't get me
anywhere, so skip it." At that moment it may be a bit hard to
pray, but try it anyway; at least conjure up a picture of Jesus
Christ in your mind and try to think of Him mad just as you
are. You can't do it, and the effort will serve to puncture your
angry emotions.
3. One of the best techniques for cooling off anger was
suggested by Mrs. Grace Oursler. She formerly employed the
usual "count to ten" technique but happened to notice that the
first ten words of the Lord's Prayer worked better. "Our
Father who art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy name." When
angry, say that ten times and your anger will lose its power
over you.
4. Anger is a great term expressing the accumulated
vehemence of a multitude of minor irritations. These
irritations, each rather small in itself, having gathered force
206
by reason of the one being added to the other, finally blaze
forth in a fury that often leaves us abashed at ourselves.
Therefore, make a list of everything that irritates you. No
matter how inconsequential it may be or how silly each is,
list it just the same. The purpose in doing this is to dry up the
tiny rivulets that feed the great river of anger.
5. Make each separate irritation a special object of prayer.
Get a victory over each, one at a time. Instead of attempting
to destroy all of your anger, which as we have pointed out is
a consolidated force, snip away by prayer each annoyance
that feeds your anger. In this way you will weaken your
anger to the point where presently you will gain control over
it.
6. Train yourself so that every time you feel the surge of
anger you say, "Is this really worth what it is doing to me
emotionally? I will make a fool of myself. I will lose
friends." In order to get the full effect of this technique,
practice saying to yourself a few times every day, "It is never
worth it to get worked up or mad about anything." Also
affirm: "It isn't worth it to spend $1000 worth of emotion on
a five-cent irritation."
7. When a hurt-feeling situation arises, get it straightened out
as quickly as possible. Don't brood over it for a minute
longer than you can help. Do something about it. Do not
allow yourself to sulk or indulge in self-pity. Don't mope
around with resentful thoughts. The minute your feelings are
hurt, do just as when you hurt your finger. Immediately
apply the cure. Unless you do so the situation can become
distorted out of all proportion. So put some spiritual iodine
on the hurt at once by saying a prayer of love and
forgiveness.
8. Apply grievance drainage to your mind. That is, open your
mind and let the grievance flow out. Go to someone you trust
and pour it out to him until not a vestige of it remains within
207
you. Then forget it.
9. Simply start praying for the person who has hurt your
feelings. Continue this until you feel the malice fading away.
Sometimes you may have to pray for quite a while to get that
result. A man who tried this method told me that he kept
account of the number of times he needed to pray until the
grievance left and peace came. It was exactly sixty-four
times. He literally prayed it out of his system. This is
positively guaranteed to work.
10. Say this little prayer: "May the love of Christ fill my
heart." Then add this line: "May the love of Christ for ——
— (insert the other's name) flood my soul." Pray this, mean it
(or ask to mean it), and you will get relief.
11. Actually take the advice of Jesus to forgive seventy times
seven. To be literal, that means four hundred ninety times.
Before you have forgiven a person that many times you will
be free of resentment.
12. Finally, this "wild, undisciplined, primitive urge in you
which flames to the surface can be tamed only by allowing
Jesus Christ to take control. Therefore, complete this lesson
by saying to Jesus Christ, "Even as You can convert a
person's morals, so now I ask You to convert my nerves. As
You give power over the sins of the flesh, so give me power
over the sins of the disposition. Bring my temper under Your
control. Give me Thy healing peace in my nervous system as
well as in my soul." If you are beset by temper, repeat the
above prayer three times every day. It might be advisable to
print it on a card and put it on your desk, or above the
kitchen sink, or in your pocketbook.

208
Chapter 13
Inflow of New Thoughts Can Remake You
ONE OF THE most important and powerful facts about you
is expressed in the following statement by William James,
who was one of the wisest men America has produced.
William James said, "The greatest discovery of my
generation is that human beings can alter their lives by
altering their attitudes of mind." As you think, so shall you
be. So flush out all old, tired, worn-out thoughts. Fill your
mind with fresh, new creative thoughts of faith, love, and
goodness. By this process you can actually remake your life.
And where do you find such personality remaking thoughts?
I know a business executive, a modest man, but the type of
individual who is never defeated. No problem, no setback, no
opposition ever gets him down. He simply attacks each
difficulty with an optimistic attitude and a sure confidence
that it will work out right, and, in some strange way, it
always does for him. He seems to have a magic touch on
life—a touch that never fails.
Because of that impressive characteristic this man always
interested me. I knew there was a definite explanation of his
being this way and of course wanted to hear his story, but in
view of his modesty and reticence it was not easy to
persuade him to talk about himself.
One day when he was in the mood he told me his secret, an
amazingly simple but effective secret. I was visiting his
plant, a modern, up-to-date structure, much of it airconditioned. Latest-type machinery and methods of
production make it a factory of outstanding efficiency.
Labor-management relations seem as nearly perfect as is
possible among imperfect human beings. A spirit of good
209
will pervades the entire organization.
His office is ultra-modernistically decorated and furnished
with handsome desks, rugs, and paneled with exotic woods.
The decorating scheme is five startling colors blended
together pleasantly. All in all it is the last word, and then
some.
Imagine, then, my surprise to see on his highly polished
white mahogany desk an old battered copy of the Bible. It
was the only old object in those ultra-modern rooms. I
commented upon this seemingly strange inconsistency.
"That book," he replied, pointing to the Bible, "is the most
up-to-date thing in this plant. Equipment wears out and
furnishing styles change, but that book is so far ahead of us
that it never gets out of date.
"When I went to college, my good Christian mother gave me
that Bible with the suggestion that if I would read and
practice its teachings, I would learn how to get through life
successfully. But I thought she was just a nice old lady"—he
chuckled—"at my age she seemed old—she wasn't really,
and to humor her, I took the Bible, but for years practically
never looked at it. I thought I didn't need it. Well," he
continued slangily, "I was a dope. I was stupid. And I got my
life in a terrible mess.
"Everything went wrong primarily because I was wrong. I
was thinking wrong, acting wrong, doing wrong. I succeeded
at nothing, failed at everything. Now I realize that my
principal trouble was wrong thinking. I was negative,
resentful, cocky, opinionated. Nobody could tell me
anything. I thought I knew everything. I was filled with
gripes at everybody. Little wonder nobody liked me. I
certainly was a 'washout.' "
So ran his dismal story. "One night in going through some
210
papers," he continued, "I came across the long-forgotten
Bible. It brought up old memories and I started aimlessly to
read it. Do you know it is strange how things happen; how in
just a flashing moment of time everything becomes different.
Well, as I read, a sentence leaped up at me, a sentence that
changed my life—and when I say changed, I mean changed.
From the minute I read that sentence everything has been
different, tremendously different."
"What is this wonderful sentence?" I wanted to know, and he
quoted it slowly, "'The Lord is the strength of my life...in this
will I be confident.' (Psalm 27:1, 3)
"I don't know why that one line affected me so," he went on,
"but it did. I know now that I was weak and a failure because
I had no faith, no confidence. I was very negative, a
defeatist. Something happened inside my mind. I guess I had
what they call a spiritual experience. My thought pattern
shifted from negative to positive. I decided to put my faith in
God and sincerely do my best, trying to follow the principles
outlined in the Bible. As I did so I began to get hold of a new
set of thoughts. I began to think differently. In time my old
failure thoughts were flushed out by this new spiritual
experience and an inflow of new thoughts gradually but
actually remade me."
So concluded the story of this businessman. He altered his
thinking, and the new thoughts which flowed in displaced the
old thoughts which had been defeating him and his life was
changed.
This incident illustrates an important fact about human
nature: you can think your way to failure and unhappiness,
but you can also think your way to success and happiness.
The world in which you live is not primarily determined by
outward conditions and circumstances but by thoughts that
habitually occupy your mind. Remember the wise words of
Marcus Aurelius, one of the great thinkers of antiquity, who
211
said, "A man's life is what his thoughts make of it."
It has been said that the wisest man who ever lived in
America was Ralph Waldo Emerson, the Sage of Concord.
Emerson declared, "A man is what he thinks about all day
long."
A famous psychologist says, "There is a deep tendency in
human nature to become precisely like that which you
habitually imagine yourself to be."
It has been said that thoughts are things, that they actually
possess dynamic power. Judged by the power they exercise
one can readily accept such an appraisal. You can actually
think yourself into or out of situations. You can make
yourself ill with your thoughts and by the same token you
can make yourself well by the use of a different and healing
type of thought. Think one way and you attract the
conditions which that type of thinking indicates. Think
another way and you can create an entirely different set of
conditions. Conditions are created by thoughts far more
powerfully than conditions create thoughts.
Think positively, for example, and you set in motion positive
forces which bring positive results to pass. Positive thoughts
create around yourself an atmosphere propitious to the
development of positive outcomes. On the contrary, think
negative thoughts and you create around yourself an
atmosphere propitious to the development of negative
results.
To change your circumstances, first start thinking differently.
Do not passively accept unsatisfactory circumstances, but
form a picture in your mind of circumstances as they should
be. Hold that picture, develop it firmly in all details, believe
in it, pray about it, work at it, and you can actualize it
according to that mental image emphasized in your positive
thinking.
212
This is one of the greatest laws in the universe. Fervently do
I wish I had discovered it as a very young man. It dawned
upon me much later in life and I have found it to be one of
the greatest if not my greatest discovery, outside of my
relationship to God. And in a deep sense this law is a factor
in one's relationship with God because it channels God's
power into personality.
This great law briefly and simply stated is that if you think in
negative terms you will get negative results. If you think in
positive terms you will achieve positive results. That is the
simple fact which is at the basis of an astonishing law of
prosperity and success. In three words: Believe and succeed.
I learned this law in a very interesting manner. Some years
ago a group of us consisting of Lowell Thomas, Captain
Eddie Rickenbacker, Branch Rickey, Raymond Thornburg,
and others established an inspirational self-help magazine
called Guideposts. This magazine has a double function:
first, by relating stories of people who through their faith
have overcome difficulties, it teaches techniques of
victorious living, victory over fear, over circumstances, over
obstacles, over resentment. It teaches faith over all manner of
negativism.
Second, as a non-profit, non-sectarian, inter-faith publication
it teaches the great fact that God is in the stream of history
and that this nation was founded on belief in God and His
laws.
The magazine reminds its readers that America is the first
great nation in history to be established on a definitely
religious premise and that unless we keep it so our freedoms
will deteriorate.
Mr. Raymond Thornburg as publisher and I as editor in
starting the magazine had no financial backing to underwrite
it. It was begun on faith. In fact, its first offices were in
213
rooms above a grocery store in the little village of Pawling,
New York. There was a borrowed typewriter, a few rickety
chairs, and that was all; all except a great idea and great
faith. Slowly a subscription list of 25,000 developed. The
future seemed promising. Suddenly one night fire broke out,
and within an hour the publishing house was destroyed and
with it the total list of subscribers. Foolishly no duplicate list
had been made.
Lowell Thomas, loyal and efficient patron of Guideposts
from the very start, mentioned this sad circumstance on his
radio broadcast and as a result we soon had 30,000
subscribers, practically all the old ones and many new ones.
The subscription list rose to approximately 40,000, but costs
increased even more rapidly. The magazine, which has
always been sold for less than cost in order widely to
disseminate the message, was more expensive than
anticipated and we were faced with difficult financial
problems. In fact, at one time it seemed almost impossible to
keep it going.
At this juncture we called a meeting, and I'm sure you never
attended a more pessimistic, negative, discouraging meeting.
It dripped with pessimism. Where were we going to get the
money to pay our bills? We figured out ways of robbing
Peter to pay Paul. Complete discouragement filled our
minds.
A woman had been invited to this meeting whom we all
regarded most highly. But one reason she was included in
this meeting was because, on a previous occasion, she had
contributed $2,000 to help inaugurate Guideposts magazine.
It was hoped that lightning might strike twice in the same
place. But this time she gave us something of more value
than money.
As this dismal meeting progressed she remained silent for a
214
long time, but finally said, "I suppose you gentlemen would
like me to make another financial contribution. I might as
well put you out of your misery. I am not going to give you
another cent."
This did not put us out of our misery. On the contrary, it put
us deeper into our misery. "But," she continued, "I will give
you something far more valuable than money."
This astonished us, for we could not possibly imagine
anything of more value than money in the circumstances.
"I am going to give you an idea," she continued, "a creative
idea."
"Well," we thought to ourselves unenthusiastically, "how can
we pay our bills with an idea?"
Ah, but an idea is just what will help you pay bills. Every
achievement in this world was first projected as a creative
idea. First the idea, then faith in it, then the means of
implementing the idea. That is the way success proceeds.
"Now," she said, "here is the idea. What is your present
trouble? It is that you lack everything. You lack money. You
lack subscribers. You lack equipment. You lack ideas. You
lack courage. Why do you lack all these requirements?
Simply because you are thinking lack. If you think lack you
create the conditions that produce a state of lack. By this
constant mental emphasis upon what you lack you have
frustrated the creative forces that can give impetus to the
development of Guideposts. You have been working hard
from the standpoint of doing many things, but you have
failed to do the one all-important thing that will lend power
to all your other efforts: you have not employed positive
thinking. Instead, you have thought in terms of lack.
"To correct that situation—reverse the mental process and
215
begin to think prosperity, achievement, success. This will
require practice but it can be done quickly if you will
demonstrate faith.
The process is to visualize; that is, to see Guideposts in terms
of successful achievement. Create a mental picture of
Guideposts as a great magazine, sweeping the country.
Visualize large numbers of subscribers, all eagerly reading
this inspirational material and profiting thereby. Create a
mental image of lives being changed by the philosophy of
achievement which Guideposts teaches monthly in its issues.
"Do not hold mental pictures of difficulties and failures, but
lift your mind above them and visualize powers and
achievements. When you elevate your thoughts into the area
of visualized attainment you look down on your problems
rather than from below up at them and thus you get a much
more encouraging view of them. Always come up over your
problems. Never approach a problem below.
"Now let me continue further," she said. "How many
subscribers do you need at the moment to keep going?"
We thought quickly and said, "100,000." We had 40,000.
"All right," she said confidently, "that is not hard. That is
easy. Visualize 100,000 people being creatively helped by
this magazine and you will have them. In fact, the minute
you can see them in your mind, you will have them."
She turned to me and said, "Norman, can you see 100,000
subscribers at this minute? Look out there, look ahead of
you. In your mind's eye can you see them?"
I wasn't convinced as yet, and I said rather doubtfully, "Well,
maybe so, but they seem pretty dim to me."
She was a little disappointed in me, I thought, as she asked,
216
"Can't you imaginatively visualize 100,000 subscribers?"
I guess my imagination wasn't working very well because all
I could see was the insufficient but actual 40,000.
Then she turned to my old friend Raymond Thornburg who
has been blessed with a gloriously victorious personality, and
she said, calling him by his nickname, "Pinky, can you
visualize 100,000 subscribers?"
I rather doubted that Pinky would see them. He is a rubber
manufacturer who gives his time freely from his own
business to help advance this inspirational, non-profit
magazine, and you would not ordinarily think that a rubber
manufacturer would respond to this type of thinking. But he
has the faculty of creative imagination. I noticed by the
fascinated look on his face that she had him. He was gazing
straight ahead with rather a look of wonder when she asked,
"Do you see the 100,000 subscribers?"
"Yes," he cried with eagerness, "yes, I do see them."
Electrified, I demanded, "Where? Point them out to me."
Then I, too, began to visualize them.
"Now," continued our friend, "let us bow our heads and
together thank God for giving us 100,000 subscribers."
Frankly I thought that was pushing the Lord rather hard, but
it was justified by a verse in the Scriptures where it says,
"And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing,
ye shall receive them." (Matthew 21:22) That means when
you pray for something, at the same time visualize what you
pray for. Believe that if it is God's will and is worthwhile, not
selfishly sought after, but for human good, that it is at that
moment given you.

217
If you have difficulty in following this reasoning, let me tell
you that from that moment until the present writing
Guideposts never lacked for anything. It has found
wonderful friends and has had fine support. It has been able
always to meet its bills, purchase needed equipment, finance
itself, and as I write these words Guideposts is nearing the
half million mark and more subscriptions are coming in
regularly, sometimes as many as three or four thousand per
day.
I recite this instance not for the purpose of advertising
Guideposts, although I strongly recommend this magazine to
all my readers, and if you would like to be a subscriber, write
to Guideposts, Pawling, New York, for information. But I
tell the story because I was awed by this experience,
realizing that I had stumbled upon a law, a tremendous law
of personal victory. I decided to apply it thereafter to my
own problems and wherever I have done so can report a
marvelous result. Wherever I have failed to do so, I have
missed great results.
It is as simple as this—put your problem in God's hands. In
your thoughts rise above the problem so that you look down
upon it, not up at it. Test it according to God's will. That is,
do not try to get success from something that is wrong. Be
sure it is right morally, spiritually, and ethically. You can
never get a right result from an error. If your thinking is
wrong, it is wrong and not right and can never be right so
long as it is wrong. If it is wrong in the essence it is bound to
be wrong in the result.
Therefore be sure it is right, then hold it up in God's name
and visualize a great result. Keep the idea of prosperity, of
achievement, and of attainment firmly fixed in your mind.
Never entertain a failure thought. Should a negative thought
of defeat come into your mind, expel it by increasing the
positive affirmation. Affirm aloud, "God is now giving me
218
success. He is now giving me attainment." The mental vision
which you create and firmly hold in consciousness will be
actualized if you continually affirm it in your thoughts and if
you work diligently and effectively. This creative process
simply stated is: visualize, prayerize, and finally actualize.
People in all walks of life who accomplish notable
achievements know the value of this law in their experience.
Henry J. Kaiser told me that at one time he was building a
levee along a riverbank, and there came a great storm and
flood which buried all his earth-moving machinery and
destroyed the work that had been done. Upon going out to
observe the damage after the water receded, he found his
workers standing around glumly looking at the mud and the
buried machinery.
He came among them and said with a smile, "Why are you
so glum?"
"Don't you see what has happened?" they asked. "Our
machinery is covered with mud."
"What mud?" he asked brightly.
"What mud!" they repeated in astonishment. "Look around
you. It is a sea of mud."
"Oh," he laughed, "I don't see any mud."
"But how can you say that?" they asked him.
"Because," said Mr. Kaiser, "I am looking up at a clear blue
sky, and there is no mud up there. There is only sunshine,
and I never saw any mud that could stand against sunshine.
Soon it will be dried up, and then you will be able to move
your machinery and start all over again."
How right he is. If your eyes are looking down in the mud
219
and you feel a sense of failure, you will create defeat for
yourself. Optimistic visualization combined with prayer and
faith will inevitably actualize achievement.
Another friend of mine who started from the lowliest
beginnings has performed some outstanding achievements. I
remember him in his schooldays as an awkward,
unprepossessing, very shy country boy. But he had character
and one of the keenest brains I have ever encountered. Today
he is an outstanding man in his line. I asked him, "What is
the secret of your success?"
"The people who have worked with me across the years and
the unlimited opportunity given any boy in the United States
of America," he replied.
"Yes, I know that is true, but I am sure you must have some
personal technique, and I would be interested in having it," I
said.
"It all lies in how you think about problems," he replied. "I
attack a problem and shake it to pieces with my mind. I put
all the mental power I have upon it. Second, I pray about it
most sincerely. Third, I paint a mental picture of success.
Fourth, I always ask myself, 'What is the right thing to do?'
for," he said, "nothing will be right if it is wrong. Nothing
that is wrong will ever come out right. Fifth, I give it all I've
got. But let me emphasize again," he concluded, "if you're
thinking defeat, change your thoughts at once. Get new and
positive thoughts. That is primary and basic in overcoming
difficulties and in achieving."
At this very minute, as you read this book, potential ideas are
in your mind. By releasing and developing these ideas you
can solve your financial problem, your business situation,
you can care for yourself and your family, and attain success
in your ventures. A steady inflow and practical use of these
creative thoughts can remake your life and you along with it.
220
There was a time when I acquiesced in the silly idea that
there is no relationship between faith and prosperity; that
when one talked about religion he should never relate it to
achievement, that it dealt only with ethics and morals or
social values. But now I realize that such a viewpoint limits
the power of God and the development of the individual.
Religion teaches that there is a tremendous power in the
universe and that this power can dwell in personality. It is a
power that can blast out all defeat and lift a person above all
difficult situations.
We have seen the demonstration of atomic energy. We know
that astonishing and enormous energy exists in the universe.
This same force of energy is resident in the human mind.
Nothing on earth is greater than the human mind in potential
power. The average individual is capable of much greater
achievement than he has ever realized.
This is true regardless of who is reading this statement.
When you actually learn to release yourself you will discover
that your mind contains ideas of such creative value that you
need not lack anything. By the full and proper use of your
power stimulated by God power, you can make your life
successful.
You can make just about anything of your life—anything
you will believe or will visualize, anything you will pray for
and work for. Look deeply into your mind. Amazing
wonders are there.
Whatever your situation may be, you can improve it. First,
quiet your mind so that inspirations may rise from its depths.
Believe that God is now helping you. Visualize achievement.
Organize your life on a spiritual basis so that God's
principles work within you. Hold firmly in your mind a
picture not of failure but of success. Do these things and
creative thoughts will flow freely from your mind. This is an
amazing law, one that can change anybody's life including
your own. An inflow of new thoughts can remake you
regardless of every difficulty you may now face, and I
repeat—every difficulty.
In the last analysis the basic reason a person fails to live a
creative and successful life is because of error within
himself. He thinks wrong. He needs to correct the error in his
thoughts. He needs to practice right thinking. When the 23rd
Psalm says, "He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness," it
not only means the paths of goodness, but the paths of rightmindedness as well. When Isaiah says, "Let the wicked
forsake his way and the unrighteous man his
thoughts," (Isaiah 55:7) it not only means that a person is to
depart from evil and do good, but that he is to change his
thinking from wrong to right, from error to truth. The great
secret of successful living is to reduce the amount of error in
oneself and increase the amount of truth. An inflow of new,
right, health-laden thoughts through the mind creatively
affects the circumstances of life, for truth always produces
right procedures and therefore right results.
Years ago I knew a young man who for a while was one of
the most complete personality failures in my entire
experience. He had a delightful personality, but he failed at
everything. A person would employ him and be enthusiastic
about him, but soon his enthusiasm would cool and it was
not long until he was out of that position. This failure pattern
was repeated many times. He was a failure as a person as
well as an employee. He missed connections with
everything. He just couldn't do anything right, and he used to
ask me, "What is wrong with me that everything goes
wrong?"
Still he had a lot of conceit. He was cocky and smug, and
had the irritating habit of blaming everybody but himself.
Something was wrong with every office with which he was
222
connected or every organization that employed him. He
blamed everybody else for his failures—never himself. He
would never look inside himself. It never occurred to him
that anything could be wrong with him.
One night, however, he wanted to talk with me, and as I had
to make a drive of about a hundred miles to deliver a speech
he drove there and back with me. On our return we stopped
along about midnight at a roadside stand for a hamburger and
a cup of coffee. I don't know what was in that hamburger
sandwich, but since this incident I have had a new respect for
hamburgers, for of a sudden he shouted, "I've got it! I've got
it!"
"You've got what?" I asked in astonishment.
"I've got the answer. Now I know what's the trouble with me.
It's that everything goes wrong with me because I myself am
wrong."
I clapped my hand on his back and said, "Boy, at last you are
on your way."
"Why, it's as clear as a crystal," he said. "I have been
thinking wrong, and as a result I have created wrong
outcomes."
By this time we were out in the moonlight standing alongside
my car, and I said to him, "Harry, you must go one step
further and ask God to make you right inwardly." I quoted
this passage from the Bible, "'Ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free.'" (John 8:32) Get the truth into
your mind and you will be free of your failures.
He became an enthusiastic practicing follower of Jesus
Christ. Through real faith and a complete change of thoughts
and personal habits, wrong thinking and wrong acting were
removed from his nature. He straightened out by developing
223
a right (or righteousness) pattern instead of an error pattern.
When he was made right, then everything began to go right
for him.
Following are seven practical steps for changing your mental
attitudes from negative to positive, for releasing creative new
thoughts, and for shifting from error patterns to truth
patterns. Try them—keep on trying them. They will work.
1. For the next twenty-four hours, deliberately speak
hopefully about everything, about your job, about your
health, about your future. Go out of your way to talk
optimistically about everything. This will be difficult, for
possibly it is your habit to talk pessimistically. From this
negative habit you must restrain yourself even if it requires
an act of will.
2. After speaking hopefully for twenty-four hours, continue
the practice for one week, then you can be permitted to be
"realistic" for a day or two. You will discover that what you
meant by "realistic" a week ago was actually pessimistic, but
what you now mean by "realistic" is something, entirely
different; it is the dawning of the positive outlook. When
most people say they are being "realistic" they delude
themselves: they are simply being negative.
3. You must feed your mind even as you feed your body, and
to make your mind healthy you must feed it nourishing,
wholesome thoughts. Therefore, today start to shift your
mind from negative to positive thinking. Start at the
beginning of the New Testament and underscore every
sentence about Faith. Continue doing this until you have
marked every such passage in the four books, Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John. Particularly note Mark 11, verses 22,
23, 24. They will serve as samples of the verses you are to
underscore and fix deeply in your consciousness.
4. Then commit the underscored passages to memory.
224
Commit one each day until you can recite the entire list from
memory. This will take time, but remember you have
consumed much more time becoming a negative thinker than
this will require. Effort and time will be needed to unlearn
your negative pattern.
5. Make a list of your friends to determine who is the most
positive thinker among them and deliberately cultivate his
society. Do not abandon your negative friends, but get closer
to those with a positive point of view for a while, until you
have absorbed their spirit, then you can go back among your
negative friends and give them your newly acquired thought
pattern without taking on their negativism.
6. Avoid argument, but whenever a negative attitude is
expressed, counter with a positive and optimistic opinion.
7. Pray a great deal and always let your prayer take the form
of thanksgiving on the assumption that God is giving you
great and wonderful things; for if you think He is, He surely
is. God will not give you any greater blessing than you can
believe in. He wants to give you great things, but even He
cannot make you take anything greater than you are
equipped by faith to receive. "According to your faith (that
is, in proportion to) be it unto you." (Matthew 9:29)
The secret of a better and more successful life is to cast out
those old, dead, unhealthy thoughts. Substitute for them new,
vital, dynamic faith thoughts. You can depend upon it—an
inflow of new thought will remake you and your life.

225
Chapter 14
Relax for Easy Power
"EVERY NIGHT IN these United States more than six
million sleeping tablets are required to put the American
people to sleep."
This startling statement was made to me several years ago by
a drug manufacturer at a convention of that industry where I
was giving a speech. Though his assertion seemed incredible,
I have been told by others who are in a position to know that
the above estimate is now an understatement.
In fact, I heard another good authority assert that the
American people are using about twelve million doses of
sleeping tablets per day. That is enough to put every twelfth
American to sleep tonight.
Statistics show that the use of sleeping tablets has risen 1000
percent in recent years. But a more recent statement is even
more startling. According to the vice-president of a large
drug manufacturing concern approximately seven billion
one-half-grain tablets are consumed yearly, which works out
at about nineteen million tablets per night.
What a pathetic situation. Sleep is a natural restorative
process. One would think that any person after a day's work
would be able to sleep peacefully, but apparently Americans
have even lost the art of sleeping. In fact, so keyed up are
they that I, a minister with ample opportunity to test the
matter, must report that the American people are so nervous
and high-strung that now it is almost next to impossible to
put them to sleep with a sermon. It has been years since I
have seen anyone sleep in church. And that is a sad situation.
A Washington official who loves to juggle figures, especially
226
astronomical figures, told me that last year in the United
States there was a total of seven and a half billion headaches.
This works itself out at approximately fifty headaches per
head per annum. Have you had your quota yet this year? Just
how this official arrived at these figures he did not say, but
shortly after our conversation I noticed a report that in a
recent year the drug industry sold eleven million pounds of
aspirin. Perhaps this era might appropriately be termed "The
Aspirin Age," as one author has called it.
An authoritative source declares that every other hospital bed
in the United States is occupied by a patient who was put
there not because he encountered a germ or had an accident
or developed an organic malady, but because of his inability
to organize and discipline his emotions.
In a clinic five hundred patients were examined hand running
and 386, or 77 percent, were found to be ill of psychosomatic
difficulties—physical illness caused largely by unhealthy
mental states. Another clinic made a study of a large number
of ulcer cases and reported that nearly half were made ill, not
as the result of physical troubles, but because the patients
worried too much or hated too much, had too much guilt, or
were tension victims.
A doctor from still another clinic made the observation that
in his opinion medical men, despite all extraordinary
scientific developments, are now able to heal by the means
of science alone less than half the maladies brought them. He
declares that in many cases patients are sending back into
their bodies the diseased thoughts of their minds. Prominent
among these diseased thoughts are anxiety and tension.
This unhappy situation has become so serious that in our
own Marble Collegiate Church, Fifth Avenue at 29th Street,
New York City, we now have twelve psychiatrists on the
staff under the supervision of Dr. Smiley Blanton. Why
psychiatrists on the staff of a church? The answer is that
227
psychiatry is a science. Its function is the analysis, diagnosis,
and treatment of human nature according to certain wellauthenticated laws and procedures.
Christianity may also be thought of as a science. It is a
philosophy, a system of theology, a system of metaphysics,
and a system of worship. It also works itself out in moral and
ethical codes. But Christianity also has the characteristics of
a science in that it is based upon a book which contains a
system of techniques and formulas designed for the
understanding and treatment of human nature. The laws are
so precise and have been so often demonstrated when proper
conditions of understanding, belief, and practice are applied
that religion may be said to form an exact science.
When a person comes to our clinic the first counselor is
perhaps a psychiatrist who in a kindly and careful manner
studies the problem and tells the patient "why he does what
he does." This is a most important fact to learn. Why, for
example, have you had an inferiority complex all your life
long, or why have you been haunted by fear, or, again, why
do you nurse resentment? Why have you always been shy
and reticent, or why do you do stupid things or make inept
statements? These phenomena of your human nature do not
just happen. There is a reason why you do what you do and it
is an important day in your life experience when at last you
discover the reason. Self-knowledge is the beginning of selfcorrection.
Following the self-knowledge process the psychiatrist turns
the patient over to the pastor who tells him how to do what
he ought to do. The pastor applies to the case, in scientific
and systematic form, the therapies of prayer, faith, and love.
The psychiatrist and the minister pool their knowledge and
combine their therapies with the result that many people
have found new life and happiness. The minister does not
attempt to be a psychiatrist nor the psychiatrist a pastor. Each
228
performs his own function but always in co-operation.
The Christianity utilized in this procedure is the undiluted
teachings of Jesus Christ, Lord and Savior of man's life. We
believe in the practical, absolute workability of the teachings
of Jesus. We believe that we can indeed "do all things
through Christ." (Philippians 4:13) The Gospel as we work
with it proves to be a literal fulfillment of the astonishing
promise, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him." (I Corinthians 2:9) Believe
(in Christ); believe in His system of thought and practice;
believe and you will overcome all fear, hate, inferiority,
guilt, and every form and manner of defeat. In other words,
no good thing is too good to be true. You have never seen,
never heard, never even imagined the things God will give to
those who love Him.
In the work of the clinic one frequent problem is that of
tension. This, to a very large degree, may be called the
prevailing malady of the American people. But not only the
American people seem to suffer from tension. The Royal
Bank of Canada some time ago devoted its monthly letter to
this problem under the title, "Let's Slow Down," and says in
part: "This monthly letter does not set itself up as a counselor
of mental and physical health, but it is attempting to break
down a problem that bedevils every adult person in Canada,"
and, I might add, in the United States as well.
The bank letter goes on to say: "We are victims of a
mounting tension; we have difficulty in relaxing. Our highstrung nervous systems are on a perpetual binge. Caught up
as we are in the rush all day, every day, and far into the
night, we are not living fully. We must remember what
Carlyle called 'the calm supremacy of the spirit over its
circumstances.' "
When a prominent banking institution calls to the attention
229
of its customers the fact that they are failing to derive from
life what they really want from it because they have become
victims of tension, it is certainly time something was done
about the situation.
In St. Petersburg, Florida, I actually saw a machine on the
street equipped with a sign, "What is your blood pressure?"
You could put a coin in a slot and get the bad news. When
you can buy a reading on blood pressure like you buy gum
out of a slot machine, it indicates that many people have this
problem.
One of the simplest methods for reducing tension is to
practice the easy-does-it attitude. Do everything more
slowly, less hectically, and without pressure. My friend
Branch Rickey, famous baseball man, told me that he would
not use a player no matter how well he hits, fields, or runs if
he is guilty of "overpressing." To be a successful big-league
baseball player there must be a flow of easy power through
every action and of course through the mind. The most
effective way to hit a ball is by the easy method, where all
the muscles are flexible and operating in correlated power.
Try to kill the ball and you will slice it or maybe miss it
altogether. This is true in golf, in baseball, in every sport.
From 1907 through 1919, except for one year, 1916, Ty
Cobb's batting average led the American League, a record so
far as I know that has never been surpassed. Ty Cobb
presented the bat with which he performed his extraordinary
feats to a friend of mine. I was permitted to take this bat in
my hand, which I did with considerable awe. In the spirit of
the game I struck a pose, as if to bat. Doubtless my batting
stance was not in any sense reminiscent of the immortal
slugger. In fact, my friend, who was himself at one time a
minor league baseball player, chuckled and said, "Ty Cobb
would never do it that way. You are too rigid, too tense. You
are obviously overtrying. You would probably strike out."
230
It was beautiful to watch Ty Cobb. The man and the bat were
one. It was a study in rhythm, and one marveled at the ease
with which he got into the swing. He was a master of easy
power. It is the same in all success. Analyze people who are
really efficient and they always seem to do things easily,
with a minimum of effort. In so doing they release maximum
power.
One of my friends, a famous businessman who handles
important affairs and varied interests, always seems to be at
ease. He does everything efficiently and quickly but is never
in a dither. He never has that anxious, frazzled look on his
face which marks people who cannot handle either their time
or their work. I inquired the secret of his obviously easy
power.
He smiled and replied, "Oh, it isn't much of a secret. I just try
keep myself in tune with God. That's all. Every morning after
breakfast," he explained, "my wife and I go into the living
room for a period of quietness. One of us reads aloud some
inspirational piece to get us into the mood of meditation. It
maybe a poem or a few paragraphs of a book. Following that
we sit quietly, each praying or meditating according to his
own mood and manner, then together we affirm the thought
that God is filling us with strength and quiet energy. This is a
definite fifteen-minute ritual and we never miss it. We
couldn't get along without it. We would crack up. As a result
I always seem to feel that I have more energy than I need and
more power than is required." So said this efficient man who
demonstrates easy power.
I know a number of men and women who practice this or
similar techniques for reducing tension. It is becoming a
quite general and popular procedure nowadays.
One February morning I was rushing down the long veranda
of a Florida hotel with a handful of mail just in from my
231
office in New York. I had come to Florida for a midwinter
vacation, but hadn't seemed to get out of the routine of
dealing with my mail the first thing in the morning. As I
hurried by, headed for a couple of hours' work with the mail,
a friend from Georgia who was sitting in a rocking chair with
his hat partially over his eyes stopped me in my headlong
rush and said in his slow and pleasant Southern drawl,
"Where are you rushing for, Doctor? That's no way to do
down here in the Florida sunshine. Come over here and 'set'
in one of these rocking chairs and help me practice one of the
greatest of the arts."
Mystified, I said, "Help you practice one of the greatest of
the arts!"
"Yes," he replied, "an art that is passing out. Not many
people know how to do it anymore."
"Well," I asked, "please tell me what it is. I don't see you
practicing any art."
"Oh, yes, I am," he said. "I am practicing the art of just sittin'
in the sun. Sit here and let the sun fall on your face. It is
warmlike and it smells good. It makes you feel peaceful
inside. Did you ever think about the sun?" he asked. "It never
hurries, never gets excited, it just works slowly and makes no
noise—doesn't push any buzzers, doesn't answer any
telephones, doesn't ring any bells, just goes on a-shining, and
the sun does more work in the fraction of an instant than you
and I could ever do in a lifetime. Think of what it does. It
causes the flowers to bloom, keeps the trees growing, warms
the earth, causes the fruit and vegetables to grow and the
crops to ripen, lifts water to send back on the earth, and it
makes you feel 'peaceful like.'
"I find that when I sit in the sun and let the sun work on me it
puts some rays into me that give me energy; that is, when I
take time to sit in the sun.
232
"So throw that mail over in the corner," he said, "and sit
down here with me."
I did so, and when finally I went to my room and got at my
mail I finished it in no time at all. And there was a good part
of the day left for vacation activities and for more "sittin' in
the sun."
Of course I know a lot of lazy people who have been sittin' in
the sun all their lives and never amounted to anything. There
is a difference between sittin' and relaxing, and just sittin'.
But if you sit and relax and think about God and get yourself
in tune with Him and open yourself to the flow of His power,
then sittin' is not laziness; in fact, it is about the best way to
renew power. It produces driving energy, the kind of energy
you drive, not the kind that drives you.
The secret is to keep the mind quiet, avoiding all hectic
reactions of haste, and to practice peaceful thinking. The
essence of the art is to keep the tempo down; to perform your
responsibilities on the basis of the most efficient
conservation of energy. It is advisable to adopt one or two
workable plans through the use of which you can become
expert in the practice of relaxed and easy power.
One of the best such plans was suggested to me by Captain
Eddie Rickenbacker. A very busy man, he manages to handle
his responsibilities in a manner indicating reserves of power.
I found one element of his secret quite by accident.
I was filming a program for television with him. We had
been assured that the work could be done quickly, leaving
him free to go to the many other matters on his daily agenda.
However, the filming was long delayed beyond the time
anticipated. I noted, however, that the Captain showed no
signs of agitation. He did not become nervous or anxious. He
did not pace up and down, putting in frantic calls to his
233
office. Instead, he accepted the situation gracefully. There
were a couple of old rocking chairs at the studio, apparently
intended for use in a set other than ours. He sat in one rocker
in a very relaxed manner.
I have always been a great admirer of Eddie Rickenbacker
and I commented on his lack of tension. "I know how busy
you are," I said, "and I marvel at the way you sit quiet,
composed, and peaceful like."
For myself, I was a bit disturbed largely because I regretted
to take so much of Captain Rickenbacker's time. "How can
you be so imperturbable?" I asked.
He laughingly replied, "Oh, I just practice what you preach.
Come on, easy does it. Sit down here beside me."
I pulled up the other rocking chair and did a little relaxing on
my own. Then I said, "Eddie, I know you have some
technique to attain this impressive serenity. Tell me about it,
please."
He is a modest man, but because of my persistence he gave
me a formula which he says he uses frequently. I now use it
myself and it is very effective. It may be described as
follows:
First, collapse physically. Practice this several times a day.
Let go every muscle in the body. Conceive of yourself as a
jellyfish, getting your body into complete looseness. Form a
mental picture of a huge burlap bag of potatoes. Then
mentally cut the bag, allowing the potatoes to roll out. Think
of yourself as the bag.
What is more relaxed than an empty burlap bag?
The second element in the formula is to "drain the mind."
Several times each day drain the mind of all irritation, all
234
resentment, disappointment, frustration, and annoyance.
Unless you drain the mind frequently and regularly, these
unhappy thoughts will accumulate until a major blasting-out
process will be necessary. Keep the mind drained of all
factors which would impede the flow of relaxed power.
Third, think spiritually. To think spiritually means to turn the
mind at regular Intervals to God. At least three times a day
"lift up your eyes unto the hills." This keeps you in tune with
God's harmony. It refills you with peace.
This three-point program greatly impressed me, and I have
been practicing it for some months. It is an excellent method
for relaxing and living on the basis of easy does it.
From my friend Dr. Z. Taylor Bercovitz, of New York City,
I have learned much of the art of working relaxed. Often
when under pressure, with an office full of patients and
telephone calls coming in, he will suddenly stop, lean against
his desk, and talk to the Lord in a manner both natural and
respectful. I like the style of his prayer. He tells me that it
runs something like this: "Look, Lord, I am pushing myself
too hard. I am getting jittery. Here I am counseling people to
practice quietness, now I must practice it. Touch me with
your healing peace. Give me composure, quietness, strength,
and conserve my nervous energy so that I can help these
people who come to me."
He stands quietly for a minute or two. Then he thanks the
Lord and proceeds with full but easy power to do his work.
Often in making sick calls about the city he finds himself in a
traffic jam. He has a most interesting method of using these
potentially irritating delays as opportunities to relax. Shutting
off his engine, he slumps in his seat, putting his head back,
closing his eyes, and has even been known to go to sleep. He
says there is no reason to be concerned about going to sleep
because the strident honking of horns will awaken him when
235
traffic begins to move.
These interludes of complete relaxation in the midst of traffic
last for only a minute or two, but they have energy-renewal
value. It is surprising how many minutes or fractions of
minutes during the day you can use to rest where you are. If
even in such fractional periods you deliberately draw on
God's power, you can maintain adequate relaxation. It isn't
length of relaxation time that produces power; it is the
quality of the experience.
I am told that Roger Babson, the famous statistician,
frequently goes into an empty church and sits quietly.
Perhaps he reads one or two hymns and in so doing finds rest
and renewal. Dale Carnegie, under tension, goes to a church
near his New York City office to spend a quarter-hour in
prayerful meditation. He says he leaves his office for this
purpose when busiest. This demonstrates control of time
rather than being controlled by it. It also indicates
watchfulness lest tension develop beyond a controllable
degree.
I encountered a friend on a train from Washington to New
York one night. This man is a member of Congress and he
explained that he was on his way to his district to speak at a
meeting of his constituents. The particular group he was
about to address was hostile to him, he said, and would
probably try to make things very difficult for him. Although
they represented a minority in his district, he was going to
face them just the same.
"They are American citizens and I am their representative.
They have a right to meet with me if they want to."
"You do not seem to be much worried about it," I
commented.
"No," he answered, "if I get worried about it, then I will be
236
upset and will not handle the situation well."
"Do you have any particular method for handling such a
tense situation?" I asked.
"Oh, yes," he replied, "they will be a noisy crowd. But I have
my own way of meeting such situations without tension. I
will breathe deeply, talk quietly, speak sincerely, be friendly
and respectful, hold my temper, and trust in God to see me
through.
"I have learned one important fact," the Congressman
continued, "and that is in any situation be relaxed, keep calm,
take a friendly attitude, have faith, do your best. Do this, and
usually you can make things come out all right."
I have no doubt about the ability of this Congressman to live
and work without tension, and, what is more, successfully to
attain his objectives.
When we were doing some construction work at my farm in
Pawling, New York, I watched a workman swinging a
shovel. He was shoveling a pile of sand. It was a beautiful
sight. Stripped to the waist, his lean and muscular body
worked with precision and correlation. The shovel rose and
fell in perfect rhythm. He would push the shovel into the
pile, lean his body against it, and drive it deep into the sand.
Then, in a clear, free swing it came up and the sand was
deposited without a break in the motion. Again the shovel
went back into the sand, again his body leaned against it,
again the shovel lifted easily in a perfect arc. One almost had
a feeling that he could sing in rhythm to the motion of this
workman. Indeed the man did sing as he worked.
I was not surprised when the foreman told me that he is
considered one of his best workmen. The foreman also spoke
of him as good-humored, happy, and a pleasant person with
whom to work. Here was a relaxed man who lived with
237
joyous power, master of the art of easy does it.
Relaxation results from re-creation, and the process of
recreation should be continuous. The human being is meant
to be attached to a continual flow of force that proceeds from
God through the individual and back to God for renewal.
When one lives in tune with this constantly re-creative
process he learns the indispensable quality to relax and work
on the basis of easy does it.
Now, how to master this skill. Here are ten rules for taking
the hard way out of your job. Try these proven methods for
working hard easily. They will help you to relax and have
easy power.
1. Don't get the idea that you are Atlas carrying the world on
your shoulders. Don't strain so hard. Don't take yourself so
seriously.
2. Determine to like your work. Then it will become a
pleasure, not drudgery. Perhaps you do not need to change
your job. Change yourself and your work will seem different.
3. Plan your work—work your plan. Lack of system
produces that "I'm swamped" feeling.
4. Don't try to do everything at once. That is why time is
spread out. Heed that wise advice from the Bible, "This one
thing I do."
5. Get a correct mental attitude, remembering that ease or
difficulty in your work depends upon how you think about it.
Think it's hard and you make it hard. Think it's easy and it
tends to become easy.
6. Become efficient in your work. "Knowledge is
power" (over your job). It is always easier to do a thing right.

238
7. Practice being relaxed. Easy always does it. Don't press or
tug. Take it in your stride.
8. Discipline yourself not to put off until tomorrow what you
can do today. Accumulation of undone jobs makes your
work harder. Keep your work up to schedule.
9. Pray about your work. You will get relaxed efficiency by
so doing.
10. Take on the "unseen partner." It is surprising the load He
will take off you. God is as much at home in offices,
factories, stores, kitchens, as in churches. He knows more
about your job than you do. His help will make your work
easy.

239
Chapter 15
How to Get People to Like You
WE MIGHT AS well admit it, we want people to like us.
You may hear someone say, "I don't care whether people like
me or not." But whenever you hear anyone say that, just put
it down as a fact that he is not really telling the truth.
The psychologist, William James, said, "One of the deepest
drives of human nature is the desire to be appreciated." The
longing to be liked, to be held in esteem, to be a sought-after
person, is fundamental in us.
A poll was taken among some high-school students on the
question, "What do you most desire?" By overwhelming
majority the students voted that they wanted to be popular.
The same urge is in older people as well. Indeed it is
doubtful if anybody ever outlives the desire to be well
thought of, to be highly regarded, or to have the affection of
his associates.
To be master of the art of popularity, be artless. Strive
deliberately after popularity and the chances are you will
never attain it. But become one of those rare personalities
about whom people say, "He certainly has something," and
you can be certain you are on the way to having people like
you.
I must warn you, however, that despite your attainments in
popularity you will never get everybody to like you. There is
a curious quirk in human nature whereby some people just
naturally won't like you. A quatrain inscribed on a wall at
Oxford says:
"I do not love thee, Dr. Fell,
The reason why I cannot tell;
240
But this alone I know full well,
I do not love thee, Dr. Fell."
That verse is very subtle. The author did not like Dr. Fell. He
didn't know why but he just knew he didn't like him. It was
most likely an unreasonable dislike, for undoubtedly Dr. Fell
was a very nice person. Perhaps if the author had known him
better he would have liked him, but poor Dr. Fell never did
become popular with the author of those lines. It may have
been due simply to a lack of rapprochement, that baffling
mechanism by which we either do or do not "click" with
certain people.
Even the Bible recognizes this unhappy fact about human
nature, for it says, "If it be possible, as much as lieth in you,
live peaceably with all men." (Romans 12:18) The Bible is a
very realistic book and it knows people, their infinite
possibilities as well as their imperfections. The Bible advised
the disciples that if they went into a village and after trying
their best to get along with people still couldn't do so, they
were to shake off the very dust of the village from their
feet—"And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out
of that city, shake off the very dust from your feet for a
testimony against them." (Luke 9:5) This is all by way of
saying that you will be wise if you do not let it too seriously
affect you if you do not achieve perfect popularity with
everyone.
However, there are certain formulas and procedures which, if
followed faithfully, can make you a person whom other
people like. You can enjoy satisfactory personal relationships
even if you are a "difficult" person or by nature shy and
retiring, even unsocial. You can make of yourself one who
enjoys easy, normal, natural, and pleasing relationships with
others.
I cannot urge you too strongly to consider the importance of
this subject and to give time and attention to its mastery, for
241
you will never be fully happy or successful until you do.
Failure in this capacity will adversely affect you
psychologically. To be liked is of profounder importance
than mere ego satisfaction. As necessary as that is to your
success in life, normal and satisfactory personal relations are
even more important.
The feeling of not being wanted or needed is one of the most
devastating of all human reactions. To the degree to which
you are sought after or needed by other people will you
become a fully-released person. The "lone wolf," the isolated
personality, the retiring individual, these people suffer a
misery which is difficult to describe. In self-defense they
retire ever further within themselves. Their ingrowing,
introverted nature is denied the normal development which
the outgoing, self-giving person experiences. Unless the
personality is drawn out of itself and can be of value to
someone, it may sicken and die. The feeling of not being
wanted or needed produces frustration, aging, illness. If you
have a feeling of uselessness, if nobody needs or wants you,
you really ought to do something about it. It is not only a
pathetic way to live but is serious psychologically. Those
who deal with the problems of human nature constantly
encounter this problem and its unfortunate results.
For example, at a Rotary Club luncheon in a certain city two
physicians were at my table: one an elderly man who had
been retired for several years, the other the most popular
young doctor in town. The young doctor, looking frazzled,
dashed in late and slumped down with a weary sigh. "If only
the telephone would stop ringing," he complained. "I can't
get anywhere because people call me all the time. I wish I
could put a silencer on that telephone."
The old doctor spoke up quietly, "I know how you feel, Jim,"
he said. "I used to feel that way myself, but be thankful the
telephone does ring. Be glad people want and need you."
242
Then he added pathetically, "Nobody ever calls me anymore.
I would like to hear the telephone ring again. Nobody wants
me and nobody needs me. I'm a has-been."
All of us at the table who sometimes feel a bit worn by
numerous activities did a lot of thinking as we listened to the
old doctor.
A middle-aged woman complained to me that she didn't feel
well. She was dissatisfied and unhappy. "My husband is
dead, the children are grown, and there is no place for me
anymore. People treat me kindly, but they are indifferent.
Everyone has his own interest and nobody needs me—
nobody wants me. I wonder, could that be a reason I do not
feel well?" she asked. Indeed that could very likely be an
important reason.
In a business office the founder of the firm just past seventy
was walking restlessly and aimlessly around. He talked with
me, while his son, present head of the business, whom I had
come to see, was on the telephone. The older man said
gloomily, "Why don't you write a book on how to retire?
That is what I need to know. I thought it was going to be
wonderful to give up the burdens of the job," he continued,
"but now I find that nobody is interested in anything I say. I
used to think I was a popular fellow, but now when I come
down here and sit around the office everyone says hello, then
they forget me. I might as well stay away altogether for all
they care. My son is running the business and he is doing a
good job of it, but," he concluded pathetically, "I'd like to
think they needed me a little bit."
These people are suffering one of the most pathetic and
unhappy experiences in this life. Their basic desire is to be
sought after and this desire is not being satisfied. They want
people to appreciate them. The personality longs for esteem.
But it isn't only in retirement that this situation develops.
243
A girl of twenty-one told me that she had been unwanted
ever since birth. Someone had given her the notion she was
an unwanted child. This serious idea had sunk into her
subconscious, giving her a profound sense of inferiority and
self-depreciation. It made her shy and backward, causing her
to retreat into herself. She became lonely and unhappy and
was, in fact, an underdeveloped personality. The cure for her
condition was to revamp her life spiritually, especially her
thinking, which process in time made her a well-liked person
by setting her personality free of herself.
Countless other people, not particularly victims of deep,
unconscious psychological conflicts, have never mastered
the knack of being popular. They try hard enough. They even
go to extremes, often acting in a manner they do not really
enjoy, but which they employ only because of their intense
desire to have people like them. Everywhere today we see
people putting on an act because of their inordinate desire for
popularity in the superficial sense in which the word is often
used in modern society.
The fact is that popularity can be attained by a few simple,
natural, normal, and easily mastered techniques. Practice
them diligently and you can become a well-liked person.
First, become a comfortable person, that is, one with whom
people can associate without a sense of strain. Of some
persons it is said, "You can never quite get next to him."
There is always a barrier that you can't get over. A
comfortable person is easygoing and natural. He has a
pleasant, kindly, genial way about him. Being with him is
not unlike wearing an old hat or an old pair of shoes, or an
easy old coat. A stiff, reserved, unresponsive individual
never meshes into the group. He is always just a bit out of it.
You never quite know how to take him or how he will react.
You just aren't easy-like with him.
Some young people were talking about a seventeen-year-old
244
boy whom they liked very much. Of him they said, "He is
good company. He is a good sport. He is easy to be with." It
is very important to cultivate the quality of being natural.
Usually that sort of individual is large-souled. Little people
who are much concerned about how you treat them, who are
jealous of their place or position, who meticulously stand on
their prerogatives, are stiff and easily offended.
A man who is an outstanding example of these truths is
James A. Parley, former Postmaster General of the United
States.
I met Mr. Parley for the first time a number of years ago.
Months later I met him in a large crowd of people and he
called me by name. Being human, I never forgot that, and it
is one reason I have always liked Mr. Parley.
An interesting incident illustrates the secret of this man who
is an expert in how to get people to like him. I was to speak
in Philadelphia at a book-and-author luncheon along with
Mr. Parley and two other authors. I did not actually witness
the scene I am about to describe, as I was late in arriving, but
my publisher did. The speakers at this luncheon were
walking along the hotel corridor together when they passed a
colored maid standing by a cart loaded with sheets, towels,
and other equipment with which she was servicing the
rooms. She was paying no attention to this group of people
as they turned aside to avoid her cart. Mr. Parley walked up
to her, put out his hand, and said, "Hello, there. How are
you? I'm Jim Parley. What's your name? Glad to see you."
My publisher looked back at her as the group passed down
the hall. The girl's mouth was wide with astonishment and
her face broke into a beautiful smile. It was an excellent
example of how an unegotistical, comfortable, outgoing
person is successful in personal relationships.
A university psychology department conducted an analysis
245
of the personality traits by which people are liked or disliked.
One hundred traits were scientifically analyzed and it was
reported that one must have forty-six favorable traits in order
to be liked. It is rather discouraging to realize that you must
have so large a number of characteristics to be popular.
Christianity, however, teaches that one basic trait will go far
toward getting people to like you. That trait is a sincere and
forthright interest in and love for people. Perhaps if you
cultivate this basic trait, other traits will naturally develop.
If you are not the comfortable type of person, I suggest that
you make study of your personality with a view toward
eliminating conscious and unconscious elements of strain
which may exist. Do not assume that the reason other people
do not like you is because of something wrong with them.
Assume, instead, that the trouble is within yourself and
determine to find and eliminate it. This will require
scrupulous honesty and it may also involve the assistance of
personality experts. The so-called "scratchy" elements in
your personality may be qualities which you have taken on
through the years. Perhaps they have been assumed
defensively, or they may be the result of attitudes developed
in your younger days. Regardless of origin they can be
eliminated by a scientific study of yourself and by your
recognition of the necessity for change followed by a process
of personality rehabilitation.
A man came to our clinic at the church seeking help in the
problem of personal relationships. About thirty-five years of
age, he was the type of person whom you would certainly
look at twice if not three times. He was splendidly
proportioned and impressive. Superficially regarding him it
was surprising that people should not like him. But he
proceeded to outline an unhappy and continuous set of
circumstances and instances to illustrate his dismal failure in
human relations.
246
"I do my best," he explained. "I have tried to put into practice
the rules I have been taught about getting along with people,
but get nowhere with the effort. People just don't like me and
what is more I am aware of it."
After talking with him it was not difficult to understand the
trouble. There was in his manner of speech a persistently
critical attitude thinly veiled but nonetheless apparent. He
had an unattractive manner of pursing his lips which
indicated a kind of primness or reproof for everybody, as if
he felt just a bit superior and disdainful toward other people.
In fact there was about him a noticeable attitude of
superiority. He was very rigid, with no flexibility of
personality.
"Isn't there some way to change myself so that people will
like me?" he demanded. "Isn't there some way I can stop
unconsciously rubbing people the wrong way?"
The young man was decidedly self-centered and egotistical.
The person he really liked was himself. Every statement,
every attitude was unconsciously measured in terms of how
it reacted on himself. We had to teach him to love other
people and to forget himself, which was of course a complete
reversal of his development. It was vital, however, to the
solution of his problem. I found that this young man was
irritable with people and he picked on them in his own mind,
though no outward conflicts with other persons developed.
Inwardly he was trying to make everybody over to suit
himself. Unconsciously people realized this, though perhaps
they did not define the trouble. Barriers were erected in their
minds toward him.
Since he was being unpleasant to people in his thoughts, it
followed that he was less than warm in his personal attitudes.
He was polite enough and managed not to be boorish and
unpleasant, but people unconsciously felt coolness in him, so
gave him the "brush-off" of which he complained. The
247
reason they did so was because in his mind he had "brushed
them off." He liked himself too well, and to build up his selfesteem he disliked others. He was suffering from self-love, a
chief cure for which is the practice of love for others.
He was bewildered and baffled when we outlined his
difficulty. But he was sincere and meant business. He
practiced the suggested techniques for developing love of
others in place of self-love. It required some fundamental
changes to accomplish this, but he succeeded in doing so.
One method suggested was that at night before retiring he
make a list of persons he had met during the day, as, for
example, the bus driver or the newsboy. He was to picture
mentally each person whose name appeared on the list, and
as he brought each face up before him he was to think a
kindly thought about that person. Then he was to pray for
each one. He was to pray around his little world. Each of us
has his own world, people with whom we do business or are
associated in one way or another.
For example, the first person outside the family whom this
young man saw in the morning was the elevator man in his
apartment house. He had not been in the habit of saying
anything to him beyond a perfunctory and growled good
morning. Now he took the time to have a little chat with the
elevator man. He asked him about his family and about his
interests. He found that the elevator operator had an
interesting point of view and some experiences which were
quite fascinating. He began to see new values in a person
who to him previously had been a mechanical robot, who ran
the elevator up and down to his floor. He actually began to
like the elevator operator and in turn the elevator man, who
had formed a pretty accurate opinion of the young man,
began to revise his views. They established a friendly
relationship. So the process went from person to person.
One day the young man said to me, "I have found that the
248
world is filled with interesting people and I never realized it
before."
When he made that observation he proved that he was losing
himself, and when he did that, as the Bible so wisely tells us,
he found himself. In losing himself he found himself and lots
of new friends besides. People learned to like him.
Learning to pray for people was important in his
rehabilitation, for when you pray for anyone you tend to
modify your personal attitude toward him. You lift the
relationship thereby to a higher level. The best in the other
person begins to flow out toward you as your best flows
toward him. In the meeting of the best in each a higher unity
of understanding is established.
Essentially, getting people to like you is merely the other
side of liking them. One of the most popular men who lived
in the United States within the lifetime of most of us was the
late Will Rogers. One of the most characteristic statements
he ever made was, "I never met a man I didn't like." That
may have been a slight exaggeration, but I am sure Will
Rogers did not regard it as such. That is the way he felt about
people, and as a result people opened up to him like flowers
to the sun.
Sometimes the weak objection is offered that it is difficult to
like some people. Granted, some people are by nature more
likable than others, nevertheless a serious attempt to know
any individual will reveal qualities within him that are
admirable, even lovable.
A man had the problem of conquering feelings of irritation
toward persons with whom he was associated. For some
people he had a very profound dislike. They irritated him
intensely, but he conquered these feelings simply by making
an exhaustive list of everything he could possibly admire
about each person who annoyed him. Daily he attempted to
249
add to this list. He was surprised to discover that people
whom he thought he did not like at all proved to have many
pleasing qualities. In fact, he was at a loss to understand how
he ever disliked them after becoming conscious of their
attractive qualities. Of course, while he was making these
discoveries about them, they, in turn, were finding new and
likable qualities in him.
If you have gone through life up to this point without having
established satisfactory human relationships, do not assume
that you cannot change, but it will be necessary to take very
definite steps toward solving the problem. You can change
and become a popular person, well liked and esteemed, if
you are willing to make the effort. May I remind you as I
remind myself that one of the greatest tragedies of the
average person is the tendency to spend our whole lives
perfecting our faults? We develop a fault and we nurse it and
cultivate it, and never change it. Like a needle caught in the
groove of a defective record on a gramophone, it plays the
same old tune over and over again. You must lift the needle
out of the groove, then you will have disharmony no longer,
but harmony. Don't spend more of your life perfecting faults
in human relations. Spend the rest of your life perfecting
your great capacities for friendliness, for personal relations
are vitally important to successful living.
Still another important factor in getting people to like you is
to practice building up the ego of other persons. The ego,
being the essence of our personalities, is sacred to us. There
is in every person a normal desire for a feeling of selfimportance. If I deflate your ego and therefore your selfimportance, though you may laugh it off, I have deeply
wounded you. In fact, I have shown disrespect for you, and
while you may exercise charity toward me, even so, unless
you are finely developed spiritually, you are not going to like
me very well.

250
On the other hand, if I elevate your self-respect and
contribute to your feeling of personal worth, I am showing
high esteem for your ego. I have helped you to be your best
self and therefore you appreciate what I have done. You are
grateful to me. You like me for it.
The deflation of another person's ego may be mildly done
perhaps, but one can never evaluate how deep the
depreciation goes from even a remark or an attitude that is
not meant to be unkind. Here is the way in which ego is often
deflated.
The next time you are in a group and someone tells a joke
and everybody laughs with appreciation and pleasure except
yourself, when the laughter has died down say patronizingly,
"Well, that is a pretty good joke all right. I saw it in a
magazine last month."
Of course it will make you feel quite important to let others
know of your superior knowledge, but how does it make the
man feel who told the joke? You have robbed him of the
satisfaction of having told a good story. You have crowded
him out of his brief moment in the limelight and usurped
attention to yourself. In fact you have taken the wind out of
his sails and left him flat and deflated. He enjoyed his
momentary little prominence, but you took it away from him.
Nobody in that group is going to like you for what you did,
and certainly not the man whose story you spoiled. Whether
you like the joke or not, let the storyteller and the others
enjoy it. Remember he may be a little bit embarrassed and
shy. It would have done him good to have received a
response. Don't deflate people. Build them up and they will
love you for it.
While writing this chapter I enjoyed a visit with an old and
dear friend, Dr. John W. Hoffman, one-time president of
Ohio Wesleyan University. As I sat with him in Pasadena, I
realized once again how much this great personality has
251
always meant to me. Many years ago, on the night before my
graduation from college, we had a banquet at our fraternity
house at which he was present and made a talk. After dinner
he asked me to walk with him to the president's house.
It was a beautiful moonlit night in June. All the way up the
hill he talked to me about life and its opportunities and told
me what a thrill awaited me as I entered the outside world.
As we stood in front of his house he put his hand on my
shoulder and said, "Norman, I have always liked you. I
believe in you. You have great possibilities. I shall always be
proud of you. You have got it in you." Of course he
overestimated me, but that is infinitely better than to
depreciate a person.
It being June and the night before graduation and excitement
being in my heart, my sentiments were pretty close to the
surface, and I said good night to him through a mist of tears
which I tried to conceal. It has been many years since then,
but I never forgot what he said nor how he said it on that
June night long ago. I have loved him all across the years.
I discovered that he made similar statements to many other
boys and girls long since become men and women and they,
too, love him because he respected their personalities and
was constantly building them up. Through the years he
would write to me and to others congratulating us on some
little thing that we had done, and a word of approval from
him meant much. Little wonder this honored guide of youth
has the affection and devotion of thousands of people whose
lives he touched.
Whomever you help to build up and become a better,
stronger, finer person will give you his undying devotion.
Build up as many people as you can. Do it unselfishly. Do it
because you like them and because you see possibilities in
them. Do this and you will never lack for friends. You will
always be well thought of. Build people up and love them
252
genuinely. Do them good and their esteem and affection will
flow back toward you.
The basic principles of getting people to like you need no
prolonged and labored emphasis, for they are very simple
and easily illustrate their own truth. However, I list ten
practical rules for getting the esteem of others. The
soundness of these principles has been demonstrated
innumerable times. Practice them until you become expert at
them and people will like you.
1. Learn to remember names. Inefficiency at this point may
indicate that your interest is not sufficiently outgoing. A
man's name is very important to him.
2. Be a comfortable person so there is no strain in being with
you—be an old-shoe, old-hat kind of individual. Be homey.
3. Acquire the quality of relaxed easy-goingness so that
things do not ruffle you.
4. Don't be egotistical. Guard against giving the impression
that you know it all. Be natural and normally humble.
5. Cultivate the quality of being interesting so that people
will want to be with you and get something of stimulating
value from their association with you.
6. Study to get the "scratchy" elements out of your
personality, even those of which you may be unconscious.
7. Sincerely attempt to heal, on an honest Christian basis,
every misunderstanding you have had or now have. Drain off
your grievances.
8. Practice liking people until you learn to do so genuinely.
Remember what Will Rogers said, "I never met a man I
didn't like." Try to be that way.
253
9. Never miss an opportunity to say a word of congratulation
upon anyone's achievement, or express sympathy in sorrow
or disappointment.
10. Get a deep spiritual experience so that you have
something to give people that will help them to be stronger
and meet life more effectively. Give strength to people and
they will give affection to you.

254
Chapter 16
Prescription for Heartache
"PLEASE GIVE ME a prescription for heartache."
This curious and rather pathetic request was made by a man
who had been informed by his doctor that the feelings of
disability of which he complained were not of a physical
nature. His trouble lay in an inability to rise above sorrow.
He was suffering from "an ache in his personality" as a result
of grief.
His doctor advised him to secure spiritual consultation and
treatment. So continuing to use the terminology of medicine,
he repeated his question, "Is there a spiritual prescription
which will reduce my constant inner suffering? I realize that
sorrow comes to everyone and I should be able to meet it the
same as others. I have tried my best but find no peace."
Again he asked with a sad, slow smile, "Give me a
prescription for heartache."
There is indeed a "prescription" for heartache. One element
in the prescription is physical activity. The sufferer must
avoid the temptation to sit and brood. A sensible program
which substitutes physical activity for such fruitless brooding
reduces the strain on the area of the mind where we reflect,
philosophize, and suffer mental pain. Muscular activity
utilizes another part of the brain and therefore shifts the
strain and gives relief.
An old country lawyer who had a sound philosophy and
much wisdom told a sorrowing woman that the best
medicine for a broken heart is "to take a scrubbing brush and
get down on your knees and go to work. The best medicine
for a man," he declared, "is to get an ax and chop wood until
physically tired." While this is not guaranteed to be a
255
complete cure for heartache, yet it does tend to mitigate such
suffering.
Whatever the character of your heartache, one of the first
steps is to resolve to escape from any defeatist situation
which may have been created around yourself, even though it
is difficult to do so, and return once again to the normal
course of your life. Get back into the main stream of life's
activities. Take up your old associations. Form new ones.
Get busy walking, riding, swimming, playing—get the blood
to coursing through your system. Lose yourself in some
worthwhile project. Fill your days with creative activity and
emphasize the physical aspect of activity. Employ healthy
mind-relieving busyness, but be sure that it is of a
worthwhile and constructive nature. Superficial escapism
through feverish activity merely deadens pain temporarily
and does not heal, as, for example, parties and drinking.
An excellent and normal release from heartache is to give
way to grief. There is a foolish point of view current today
that one should not show grief, that it is not proper to cry or
express oneself through the natural mechanism of tears and
sobbing. This is a denial of the law of nature. It is natural to
cry when pain or sorrow comes. It is a relief mechanism
provided in the body by Almighty God and should be used.
To restrain grief, to inhibit it, to bottle it up, is to fail to use
one of God's means for eliminating the pressure of sorrow.
Like every other function of the human body and nervous
system, this must be controlled, but it should not be denied
altogether. A good cry by either man or woman is a release
from heartache. I should warn, however, that this mechanism
should not be used unduly nor allowed to become a habitual
process. Should that happen, it partakes of the nature of
abnormal grief and could become a psychosis. Unrestraint of
any kind should not be allowed.
I receive many letters from people whose loved ones have
256
died. They tell me that it is very difficult for them to go to
the same places they were in the habit of frequenting
together or to be with the same people with whom they
associated as a couple or as a family. Therefore they avoid
the old-time places and friends.
I regard this as a serious mistake. A secret of curing
heartache is to be as normal and natural as possible. This
does not imply disloyalty or indifference. This policy is
important in avoiding a state of abnormal grief. Normal
sorrow is a natural process and its normality is evidenced by
the ability of the individual to return to his usual pursuits and
responsibilities and continue therein as formerly.
The deeper remedy for heartache, of course, is the curative
comfort supplied by trust in God.
Inevitably the basic prescription for heartache is to turn to
God in an attitude of faith and empty the mind and heart to
Him. Perseverance in the act of spiritual self-emptying will
finally bring healing to the broken heart. This generation,
which has suffered fully as much if not more heartache than
people in preceding eras, needs to relearn that which the
wisest men of all time have known, namely, that there is no
healing of the pain suffered by humanity except through the
benign ministrations of faith.
One of the greatest souls of the ages was Brother Lawrence,
who said, "If in this life we would know the serene peace of
Paradise, we must school ourselves in familiar, humble, and
loving converse with God." It is not advisable to attempt to
carry the burden of sorrow and mental pain without Divine
help, for its weight is more than the personality can bear. The
simplest and most effective of all prescriptions for heartache
then is to practice the presence of God. This will soothe the
ache in your heart and ultimately heal the wound. Men and
women who have experienced great tragedy tell us that this
257
prescription is effective.
Another profoundly curative element in the prescription for
heartache is to gain a sound and satisfying philosophy of life
and death and deathlessness. For my part, when I gained the
unshakable belief that there is no death, that all life is
indivisible, that the here and hereafter are one, that time and
eternity are inseparable, that this is one unobstructed
universe, then I found the most satisfying and convincing
philosophy of my entire life.
These convictions are based upon sound foundations, the
Bible for one. I believe that the Bible gives us a very subtle,
and as will be proved ultimately, a scientific series of
insights into the great question, "What happens when a man
leaves this world?" Also the Bible very wisely tells us that
we know these truths by faith. Henri Bergson, the
philosopher, says that the surest way into truth is by
perception, by intuition, by reasoning to a certain point, then
by taking a "mortal leap," and by intuition attaining the truth.
You come to some glorious moment where you simply
"know." That is the way it happened to me.
I am absolutely, wholeheartedly, and thoroughly convinced
of the truth of which I write and have no doubt of it, even to
an infinitesimal degree. I arrived at this positive faith
gradually, yet there came one moment when I knew.
This philosophy will not ward off the sorrow which comes
when a loved one dies and physical, earthly separation
ensues. But it will lift and dissipate grief. It will fill your
mind with a deep understanding of the meaning of this
inevitable circumstance. And it will give you a deep
assurance that you have not lost your loved one. Live on this
faith and you will be at peace and the ache will leave your
heart.
Take into your mind and heart one of the most marvelous
258
texts in the Holy Bible—"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which
God hath prepared for them that love Him." (I Corinthians
2:9)
This means that you have never seen, no matter what you
have seen, however wonderful it is, you have never seen
anything to compare with the marvelous things that God has
prepared for those who love Him and who put their trust in
Him. Moreover, it says that you have never heard anything to
compare with the astonishing marvels that God has laid up
for those who follow His teachings and live according to His
spirit. Not only have you never seen nor ever heard but you
have never even dimly imagined what He is going to do for
you. This sentence goes all out in promising comfort and
immortality and reunion and every good thing to those who
center their lives in God.
After many years of reading the Bible and being intimately
connected with all the phases of the lives of hundreds of
people, I wish to state unequivocally that I have found this
Biblical promise to be absolutely true. It applies even to this
world. People who really practice living on a Christlike basis
have the most incredible things happen to them.
This passage also relates to the state of existence of those
now living on the other side and our relationship, while we
live, to those who have preceded us across that barrier which
we call death. I use the word "barrier" somewhat
apologetically. We have always thought of death as a barrier
with a concept of a separatist nature.
Scientists working today in the field of parapsychology and
extra-sensory perception and experimenting in precognition,
telepathy, clairvoyance (all of which were formerly
considered paraphernalia of the cranks, but which are now of
sound, scientific usage in the laboratories), are expressing
themselves as believing that the soul survives the barrier of
259
time and space. In effect, we are on the edge of one of the
greatest scientific discoveries in history which will
substantiate, on a laboratory-exploratory basis, the existence
of the soul and its deathlessness.
For many years I have been accumulating a series of
incidents, the validity of which I accept and which bear out
the conviction that we live in a dynamic universe where life,
not death, is the basic principle. I have confidence in the
people who have described the following experiences and am
convinced that they indicate a world impinged upon or
intertwined with our own through the meshes of which
human spirits, on both sides of death, live in unbroken
fellowship. The conditions of life on the other side, as we
know them in mortality, are modified. Undoubtedly those
who have crossed to the other side dwell in a higher medium
than we do and their understanding is amplified beyond ours,
yet all the facts point to the continued existence of our loved
ones and the further fact that they are not far away, and still
another fact implied, but no less real, that we shall be
reunited with them. Meanwhile, we continue in fellowship
with those who dwell in the spirit world.
William James, one of America's greatest scholars, after a
lifetime of study said he was satisfied that the human brain is
only a medium for the soul's existence and that the mind as
now constituted will be exchanged at last for a brain that will
allow the owner to reach out into untapped areas of
understanding. As our spiritual being is amplified here on
earth and as we grow in age and experience we become more
conscious of this vaster world all around us, and when we die
it is only to enter into an enlarged capacity.
Euripides, one of the greatest thinkers of antiquity, was
convinced that the next life would be of infinitely greater
magnitude. Socrates shared the same concept. One of the
most comforting statements ever made was his remark, "No
260
evil can befall a good man in this life or in the next."
Natalie Kalmus, scientific expert in technicolor, tells about
the death of her sister. The following account given by this
scientifically trained woman appeared in the inspirational
magazine Guideposts.
Natalie Kalmus quotes her dying sister as saying, " 'Natalie,
promise me that you won't let them give me any drugs. I
realize that they are trying to help relieve my pain, but I want
to be fully aware of every sensation. I am convinced that
death will be a beautiful experience.'
"I promised. Alone, later, I wept, thinking of her courage.
Then as I tossed in bed on through the night, I realized that
what I thought to be a calamity my sister intended to be a
triumph.
"Ten days later the final hour drew near. I had been at her
bedside for hours. We had talked about many things, and
always I marveled at her quiet, sincere confidence in eternal
life. Not once did the physical torture overcome her spiritual
strength. This was something that the doctors simply hadn't
taken into account.
"'Dear kind God, keep my mind clear and give me peace,' she
had murmured over and over again during those last days.
"We had talked so long that I noticed she was drifting off to
to sleep. I left her quietly with the nurse and retired to get
some rest. A few minutes later I heard my sister's voice
calling for me. Quickly I returned to her room. She was
dying.
"I sat on her bed and took her hand. It was on fire. Then she
seemed to rise up in bed almost to a sitting position.
" 'Natalie,' she said, 'there are so many of them. There's
261
Fred... and Ruth...what's she doing here? Oh, I know!'
"An electric shock went through me. She had said Ruth.
Ruth was her cousin who had died suddenly the week before.
But Eleanor had not been told of Ruth's sudden death.
"Chill after chill shot up and down my spine. I felt on the
verge of some powerful, almost frightening knowledge. She
had murmured Ruth's name.
"Her voice was surprisingly clear. 'It's so confusing. So many
of them!' Suddenly her arms stretched out as happily as when
she had welcomed me! 'I'm going up,' she said.
"Then she dropped her arms around my neck—and relaxed
in my arms. The will of her spirit had turned final agony into
rapture.
"As I laid her head back on the pillow, there was a warm,
peaceful smile on her face. Her golden-brown hair lay
carelessly on the pillow. I took a white flower from the vase
and placed it in her hair. With her petite, trim figure, her
wavy hair, the white flower, and the soft smile, she looked
once more—and permanently—just like a schoolgirl."
The mention of her cousin Ruth by the dying girl and the
evident fact that she saw her clearly is a phenomenon that
recurs again and again in the incidents which have come to
my attention. So repetitive is this phenomenon and so similar
are the characteristics of this experience as described by
many that it amounts to a substantial evidence that the people
whose names are called, whose faces are seen, are actually
present.
Where are they? What is their condition? What sort of body
have they? These are questions that are difficult. The idea of
a different dimension is probably the most tenable, or it may
be more accurate to believe that they live in a different
262
frequency cycle.
It is impossible to see through the blades of an electric fan
when it is in a stationary position. At high speed, however,
the blades appear to be transparent. In the higher frequency
or the state in which our loved ones dwell, the impenetrable
qualities of the universe may open to the gaze of one passing
into the mysteries. In deep moments of our own lives it is
entirely possible that we enter to a degree at least into that
higher frequency. In one of the most beautiful lines in
English literature, Robert Ingersoll suggests this great truth,
"In the night of death, hope sees a star and listening love can
hear the rustle of a wing."
A famous neurologist tells of a man who was at death's door.
The dying man looked up at the physician sitting beside his
bed and began to call off names which the physician wrote
down. The doctor was personally unfamiliar with any name
mentioned. Later the physician asked the man's daughter,
"Who are these people? Your father spoke of them as if he
saw them."
"They are all relatives," she said, "who have been dead a
long time."
The physician said he believes his patient did see them.
Friends of mine, Mr. and Mrs. William Sage, lived in New
Jersey and I was often in their home. Mr. Sage, whom his
wife called Will, died first. A few years later, when Mrs.
Sage was on her deathbed, the most surprised look passed
across her face, and it lighted up in a wonderful smile as she
said, "Why, it is Will." That she saw him those about her bed
had no doubt whatsoever.
Arthur Godfrey, famous radio personality, tells of being
asleep in his bunk on a destroyer in World War I. Suddenly
his father stood beside him. He put out his hand, smiled, and
263
said, "So long, son," and Godfrey answered, "So long, Dad."
Later he was awakened and given a cablegram telling him of
the death of his father. The time of his passing was given,
and it was the precise period during which Godfrey in his
sleep "saw" his father.
Mary Margaret McBride, also a famous radio personality,
was overwhelmed with grief upon the death of her mother.
They had been very close to each other. She awakened one
night and sat on the edge of her bed. Suddenly she had the
feeling, to use her own words, that "Mama was with me."
She did not see her mother nor hear her speak, but from that
time on, "I knew that my mother isn't dead—that she is near
by."
The late Rufus Jones, one of the most famous spiritual
leaders of our time, tells about his son Lowell who died at
twelve years of age. He was the apple of his father's eye. The
boy took sick when Dr. Jones was on the ocean bound for
Europe. The night before entering Liverpool, while lying in
his bunk, he experienced an indefinable, inexplainable
feeling of sadness. Then he said that he seemed to be
enveloped in the arms of God. A great feeling of peace and a
sense of a profound possession of his son came to him.
Upon landing in Liverpool he was advised that his son had
died, his death occurring at the precise hour when Dr. Jones
had felt a sense of God's presence and the everlasting
nearness of his son.
A member of my church, Mrs. Bryson Kalt, tells of an aunt
whose husband and three children were burned to death
when their house was destroyed by fire. The aunt was badly
burned but lived for three years. When finally she lay dying a
radiance suddenly came over her face. "It is all so beautiful,"
she said. "They are coming to meet me. Fluff up my pillows
and let me go to sleep."
264
Mr. H. B. Clarke, an old friend of mine, was for many years
a construction engineer, his work taking him into all parts of
the world. He was of a scientific turn of mind, a quite
restrained, factual, unemotional type of man. I was called
one night by his physician, who said that he did not expect
him to live but a few hours. His heart action was slow and
the blood pressure was extraordinarily low. There was no
reflex action at all. The doctor gave no hope.
I began to pray for him, as did others. The next day his eyes
opened and after a few days he recovered his speech. His
heart action and blood pressure returned to normal. After he
recovered strength he said, "At some time during my illness
something very peculiar happened to me. I cannot explain it.
It seemed that I was a long distance away. I was in the most
beautiful and attractive place I have ever seen. There were
lights all about me, beautiful lights. I saw faces dimly
revealed, kind faces they were, and I felt very peaceful and
happy. In fact, I have never felt happier in my life.
"Then the thought came to me, 'I must be dying.' Then it
occurred to me, 'Perhaps I have died.' Then I almost laughed
out loud, and asked myself, 'Why have I been afraid of death
all my life? There is nothing to be afraid of in this.' "
"How did you feel about it?" I asked. "Did you want to come
back to life? Did you want to live, for you were not dead,
although the doctor felt that you were very close to death.
Did you want to live?"
He smiled and said, "It did not make the slightest difference.
If anything, I think I would have preferred to stay in that
beautiful place."
Hallucination, a dream, a vision—I do not believe so. I have
spent too many years talking to people who have come to the
edge of "something" and had a look across, who
unanimously have reported beauty, light, and peace, to have
265
any doubt in my own mind.
The New Testament teaches the indestructibility of life in a
most interesting and simple manner. It describes Jesus after
His crucifixion in a series of appearances, disappearances,
and reappearances. Some saw Him and then He vanished out
of their sight. Then others saw Him and again He vanished.
It is as if to say, "You see me and then you do not see me."
This indicates that He is trying to tell us that when we do not
see Him, it does not mean He is not there. Out of sight does
not mean out of life.
Occasional mystical appearances which some experience
indicate the same truth, that He is near by. Did He not say,
"...because I live, ye shall live also." (John 14:19) In other
words, our loved ones who have died in this faith are also
near by and occasionally draw near to comfort us.
A boy serving in Korea wrote to his mother, saying, "The
strangest things happen to me. Once in a while at night,
when I am afraid, Daddy seems to be with me." Daddy had
been dead for ten years. Then the boy wistfully asks his
mother, "Do you think that Daddy can actually be with me
here on these Korean battlefields?" The answer is, "Why
not?" How can we be citizens of a scientific generation and
not believe that this could be true? Again and again proofs
are offered that this is a dynamic universe, surcharged with
mystic, electric, electronic, atomic forces, and all are so
wonderful that we have never yet comprehended them. This
universe is a great spiritual sounding house, alive and vital.
Albert E. Cliff, well-known Canadian writer, tells of the
death of his father. The dying man had sunk into a coma and
it was thought he was gone. Then a momentary resurgence of
life occurred. His eyes flickered open. On the wall was one
of those old-time mottoes which said, "I Know That My
Redeemer Liveth." The dying man opened his eyes, looked
at that motto, and said, "I do know that my Redeemer liveth,
266
for they are all here around me—mother, father, brothers,
and sisters." Long gone from this earth were they all, but
evidently he saw them. Who is to gainsay?
The late Mrs. Thomas A. Edison told me that when her
famous husband was dying he whispered to his physician, "It
is beautiful over there." Edison was the world's greatest
scientist. All his life he had worked with phenomena. He was
of a factual cast of mind. He never reported anything as a
fact until he saw it work. He would never have reported, "It
is very beautiful over there" unless, having seen, he knew it
to be true.
Many years ago a missionary went to the South Sea Islands
to work among a cannibal tribe. After many months he
converted the chief to Christianity. One day this old chief
said to the missionary, "Remember the time you first came
among us?"
"Indeed I do," replied the missionary. "As I went through the
forest I became aware of hostile forces all around me."
"They did indeed surround you," said the chief, "for we were
following you to kill you, but something prevented us from
doing it."
"And what was that?" asked the missionary.
"Now that we are friends, tell me," coaxed the chief, "who
were those two shining ones walking on either side of you?"
My friend, Geoffrey O'Hara, famous song writer, author of
the popular World War I song, "Katy," also "There Is No
Death," "Give a Man a Horse He Can Ride," and other songs,
tells of a colonel in World War I whose regiment was wiped
out in a bloody engagement. As he paced up and down the
trench he says he could feel their hands and sense their
presence. He said to Geoffrey O'Hara, "I tell you, there is no
267
death." Mr. O'Hara wrote one of his greatest songs using that
title, "there is no death."
Of these deep and tender matters I personally have no doubt
whatsoever. I firmly believe in the continuation of life after
that which we call death takes place. I believe there are two
sides to the phenomenon known as death—this side where
we now live and the other side where we shall continue to
live. Eternity does not start with death. We are in eternity
now. We are citizens of eternity. We merely change the form
of the experience called life, and that change, I am
persuaded, is for the better.
My mother was a great soul, and her influence on me will
ever stand out in my life as an experience that cannot be
surpassed. She was a wonderful conversationalist. Her mind
was keen and alert. She traveled the world over and enjoyed
wide contacts as a Christian leader in missionary causes. Her
life was full and rich. She had a marvelous sense of humor.
She was good company, and I always loved to be with her.
She was considered by all who knew her an unusually
fascinating and stimulating personality.
During my adult years whenever I had the opportunity I
would go home to see her. I always anticipated the arrival at
the family home, for it was an exciting experience in which
everyone talked at once as we sat around the breakfast table.
What happy reunions—what glorious meetings. Then came
her death, and we tenderly laid her body in the beautiful little
cemetery at Lynchburg in southern Ohio, a town where she
had lived as a girl. I was very sad the day we left her there,
and went away heavy-hearted. It was in the fullness of
summertime when we took her home to her last resting
place.
It came autumn, and I felt that I wanted to be with my
mother again. I was lonely without her, therefore I decided to
go to Lynchburg. All night long on the train I thought sadly
268
of the happy days now gone and how things were utterly
changed and would never be the same again.
So I came to the little town. The weather was cold and the
sky overcast as I walked to the cemetery. I pushed through
the old iron gates and my feet rustled in the leaves as I
walked to her grave where I sat sad and lonely. Of a sudden
the clouds parted and the sun came through. It lighted up the
Ohio hills in gorgeous autumn colors, the hills where I grew
up as a boy, which I have always loved so well, where she
herself had played as a girl in the long ago.
Then all of a sudden I seemed to hear her voice. Now I didn't
actually hear her voice, but I seemed to. I am sure I heard it
by the inward ear. The message was clear and distinct. It was
stated in her beloved old-time tone, and this is what she said,
"Why seek ye the living among the dead? I am not here. Do
you think that I would stay in this dark and dismal place? I
am with you and my loved ones always." In a burst of inner
light I became wondrously happy. I knew that what I had
heard was the truth. The message came to me with all the
force of actuality. I could have shouted, and I stood up and
put my hand on the tombstone and saw it for what it is, only
a place where mortal remains lay. The body was there, to be
sure, but it was only a coat that had been laid off because the
wearer needed it no longer. But she, that gloriously lovely
spirit, she was not there.
I walked out of that place and only rarely since have I
returned. I like to go back there and think of her and the old
days of my youth, but no longer is it a place of gloom. It is
merely a symbol, for she is not there. She is with us her
loved ones. "Why seek ye the living among the dead?" (Luke
24:5)
Read and believe the Bible as it tells about the goodness of
God and the immortality of the soul. Pray sincerely and with
faith. Make prayer and faith the habit of your life. Learn to
269
have real fellowship with God and with Jesus Christ. As you
do this you will find a deep conviction welling up in your
mind that these wonderful things are true indeed.
"...if it were not so, I would have told you." (John 14:2) You
can depend upon the reliability of Christ. He would not let
you believe and hold convictions so sacred in nature unless
they are absolutely true.
So in this faith, which is a sound, substantial, and rational
view of life and eternity, you have the prescription for
heartache.

270
Chapter 17
How to Draw upon That Higher Power
FOUR MEN WERE sitting in the locker room of a country
club after a game. Talk about golf scores drifted into a
discussion of personal difficulties and problems. One man
was especially despondent. The others, his friends, realizing
his unhappy state of mind, had arranged this game to get his
mind off his difficult situation. They hoped a few hours on
the golf course might afford him some relief.
Now, as they sat around after the game, various suggestions
were offered him. Finally one of the men arose to go. He
knew about difficulties, for he'd had plenty himself, but he
had found some vital answers to his problems. He stood
hesitantly, then laid his hand on his friend's shoulder.
"George," he said, "I hope you won't think I am preaching at
you. Really, I'm not, but I would like to suggest something.
It's the way I got through my difficulties. It really works if
you work at it, and it's this. 'Why not draw upon that Higher
Power?' "
He slapped his friend affectionately on the back and left the
group. The other men sat mulling this over. Finally the
discouraged man said slowly, "I know what he means and I
know where the Higher Power is. I only wish I knew how to
draw upon it. It's what I need all right."
Well, in due course he discovered how to draw upon that
Higher Power, and it changed everything for him. Now he is
a healthy, happy man.
The advice given at the golf club is really very wise. There
are many people today who are unhappy and depressed and
just not getting anywhere with themselves or with
conditions. And they do not need to be that way. Really they
271
don't. The secret is to draw upon that Higher Power. And
how is that done?
Let me tell you about a personal experience. When quite
young I was called to a large church in a university
community and many of my congregation were professors in
the university as well as leading citizens of the city. I wanted
to justify the confidence of those who gave me such an
outstanding opportunity and accordingly worked very hard.
As a result I began to experience overstrain. Everyone should
work hard, but there is no virtue in overtrying or
overpressing to such an extent that you do not work
efficiently. It is somewhat like making a golf shot. Try to
"kill" the ball and you execute the shot poorly. You can do
likewise in your job. I began to get rather tired and nervous
and had no feeling of normal power.
One day I decided to call on one of the professors, the late
Hugh M. Tilroe, a great friend of mine. He was a wonderful
teacher, and he was also a great fisherman and hunter. He
was a man's man, an outdoor personality. I knew that if I did
not find him at the university he would be out on the lake
fishing, and sure enough there he was. He came ashore at my
hail. "The fish are biting—come on," he said. I climbed in
his boat and we fished awhile.
"What's the matter, son?" he asked with understanding. I told
him how hard I was trying and that it was getting me down
nervously. "I have no feeling of lift or power," I said.
He chuckled. "Maybe you're trying too hard."
As the boat scraped the shore he said, "Come in the house
with me." As we entered his cabin he ordered, "Lie down
there on that couch. I want to read you something. Shut your
eyes and relax while I find the quotation."
I did as directed, and thought he was going to read me some
272
philosophical or perhaps diverting piece, but instead he said,
"Here it is. Listen quietly while I read it to you. And let these
words sink in. 'Hast thou not known? Hast thou not heard,
that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of
the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? There is no
searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the faint;
and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. Even
the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall
utterly fall. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they
shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not
faint.'" (Isaiah 40:28-31) Then he asked, "Do you know from
what I am reading?"
"Yes, the fortieth chapter of Isaiah," I answered.
"I'm glad you know your Bible," he commented. "Why don't
you practice it? Now relax. Take three deep breaths—in and
out slowly. Practice resting yourself in God. Practice
depending upon Him for His support and power. Believe He
is giving it to you now and don't get out of touch with that
power. Yield yourself to it—let it flow through you.
"Give your job all you've got. Of course you must do that.
But do it in a relaxed and easy manner like a batter in a bigleague ball game. He swings the bat easy-like, and doesn't try
to knock the ball out of the park. He just does the best he can
and believes in himself because he knows that he has lots of
reserve power." Then he repeated the passage again. " 'They
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength.' "
That was a long time ago, but I never forgot that lesson. He
taught me how to draw upon that Higher Power, and believe
me, his suggestions worked. I continue to follow my friend's
advice, and it has never failed me in the more than twenty
years that have passed since then. My life is crowded with
activity but that power formula gives me all the strength I
need.
273
A second method for drawing upon that Higher Power is to
learn to take a positive, optimistic attitude toward every
problem. In direct proportion to the intensity of the faith
which you muster will you receive power to meet your
situations. "According to your faith be it unto
you," (Matthew 9:29) is a basic law of successful living.
There is a Higher Power, and that Power can do everything
for you. Draw upon it and experience its great helpfulness.
Why be defeated when you are free to draw upon that Higher
Power? State your problem. Ask for a specific answer.
Believe that you are getting that answer. Believe that now,
through God's help, you are gaining power over your
difficulty.
A man and his wife who were in real trouble came to see me.
This gentleman, a former magazine editor, was a
distinguished figure in music and artistic circles. Everyone
liked him for his geniality and friendliness. His wife was
held in similar high regard.
She was in poor health and as a result they had retired to the
country where they were living in semi-seclusion.
This man told me he had experienced two heart attacks, one
quite severe. His wife was in a steady decline and he was
deeply concerned about her. The question he put was this:
"Can I get hold of some power that can help us recover
ourselves physically and give us new hope and courage and
strength?" The situation as he described it was a series of
discouragements and defeats.
Frankly I felt that he was a bit too sophisticated to permit
himself to adopt and utilize the simple trust that would be
necessary if faith were to rehabilitate him. I told him I rather
doubted he had the capacity to practice simple faith enough
to open the sources of power according to the techniques of
Christianity.
274
But he assured me he was in earnest and was open-minded
and would follow any directions given. I saw his honesty and
the real quality of his soul and have had a great affection for
him ever since. I gave him a simple prescription. He was to
read the New Testament and the Psalms until his mind was
saturated with them. I gave him the usual suggestion of
committing passages to memory. Principally I urged him to
utilize the formula of putting his life in the hands of God, at
the same time believing that God was filling him with power,
and his wife also, and that the two of them were to believe
unfalteringly that they were being guided in even the most
commonplace details of their lives.
They were also to believe that in co-operation with their
physician, whom I happened to know and admire, that the
healing grace of Jesus Christ was being given them. I
suggested that they picture the healing power of the Great
Physician as already working within them.
Seldom have I seen two people who became more gloriously
childlike in their faith and whose trust was more complete.
They became enthusiastic about the Bible and would often
telephone me about "some wonderful passage" they had just
found. They gave me fresh insights into the truths of the
Bible. It was a truly creative process working with this man
and his wife.
The next spring Helen (that is the wife's name) said, "I have
never experienced a more wonderful springtime. The flowers
this year are the loveliest I have ever seen, and have you
noticed the sky with its extraordinary cloud formations and
the delicate colors at dawn and sunset? The leaves seem
greener this year, and I have never heard the birds sing with
such ecstasy and melody." When she said this there was an
ecstatic light on her face and I knew she had been reborn in
the spirit. And she began to improve physically, regaining a
large share of her old-time strength. Her native creative
275
power began to flow forth once again and life took on new
meaning.
As for Horace, there has been no more heart trouble, and
physical, mental, and spiritual vigor mark him as
extraordinarily vital. They have moved into a new
community and have become a center of its life. Wherever
they go they touch people with a strange uplifting force.
What is the secret which they discovered? Simply that they
learned to draw upon that Higher Power.
This Higher Power is one of the most amazing facts in
human existence. I am awestruck, no matter how many times
I have seen the phenomenon, by the thorough-going,
tremendous, overwhelming changes for good that it
accomplishes in the lives of people. Personally, I am so
enthusiastic about all that the Higher Power can do for
people that I am loath to bring this book to a close. I could
recite story after story, incident after incident of those who
by laying hold of this power have had a new birth of life.
This power is constantly available. If you open to it, it will
rush in like a mighty tide. It is there for anybody under any
circumstances or in any condition. This tremendous inflow
of power is of such force that in its inrush it drives
everything before it, casting out fear, hate, sickness,
weakness, moral defeat, scattering them as though they had
never touched you, refreshing and restrengthening your life
with health, happiness, and goodness.
For many years I have been interested in the problem of the
alcoholic and in the organization known as Alcoholics
Anonymous. One of their basic principles is that before a
person can be helped he must recognize that he is an
alcoholic and that of himself he can do nothing; that he has
no power within himself; that he is defeated. When he
accepts this point of view he is in a position to receive help
276
from other alcoholics and from the Higher Power—God.
Another principle is the willingness to depend upon the
Higher Power from whom he derives a strength which he
does not himself possess. The working of this power in men's
lives is the most moving and thrilling fact in this world. No
other manifestation of power of any kind is equal to it.
Materialistic power achievement is a romantic story. Men
discover laws and formulas and harness power to do
remarkable things. Spiritual power also follows laws.
Mastery of these laws works wonders in an area more
complicated than any form of mechanics, namely, human
nature. It is one thing to make a machine work right. To
make human nature work right is something else. It requires
greater skill, but it can be done.
I sat one day under swaying palm trees in Florida listening to
the story of a demonstration of Higher Power activity in the
life of a man who narrowly escaped tragedy. He told me that
he started drinking at the age of sixteen, "as it was the socalled smart thing to do." After twenty-three years,
beginning as a social drinker, he "came to the end of the road
on April 24, 1947." A growing hatred and bitterness toward
his wife who had deserted him and toward his mother-in-law
and sister-in-law culminated in his decision to kill these three
women. I relate the story as he told it to me, in his own
language.
"To strengthen myself for this gory task I went into a bar. A
few more drinks would give me the courage to commit this
triple murder. As I entered the bar I saw a young man by the
name of Carl drinking coffee. Although I had hated Carl
from boyhood I was utterly astounded to note his immaculate
appearance, and I was also astonished to see him drinking
coffee in a bar where he had spent on an average of $400 a
month for drinks alone. Also I was mystified by what
seemed a strange light on his face. Being fascinated by his
277
appearance, I approached Carl and asked, 'What happened to
you that you are drinking coffee?'
'"I have not had a drink for a year,' Carl replied.
"I was utterly amazed, because Carl and I had been on many
drinking bouts together. A strange incident in this affair is
that even though I hated Carl I was strangely moved. I could
not help but listen when he asked, 'Ed, did you ever want to
quit drinking?'
'"Yes, I have quit a thousand times,' I replied.
"Carl smiled and said, 'If you really want to do something
about your problem, get sober and attend a meeting at the
Presbyterian Church at nine on Saturday. It is a meeting of
Alcoholics Anonymous.'
"I told him I had no interest in religion, but that maybe I
would come. I was unimpressed, but still I could not get that
light in his eyes out of my mind.
"Carl did not insist that I attend the meeting, but repeated
that if I wanted to do something for myself he and his
associates had an answer to my problem. After making that
statement Carl left and I stood up to the bar to order a drink,
but somehow it had lost its appeal. So, instead, I went home,
the only home I had remaining, my mother's home.
"May I explain that I had been married for seventeen years to
a very fine girl, but being an impatient person and having no
faith in me due to my drinking, she finally decided upon
getting a divorce, so not only my job and all my material
assets but my home also were completely lost.
"Upon getting to my mother's home I wrestled with a bottle
until 6 A.M., but still could not take the drink. I kept thinking
of Carl's appearance. So on Saturday morning I went to Carl
278
and asked him what I could do to keep from taking a drink
until nine o'clock that night when the meeting would be held.
"Carl said, 'Every time you come to a bar or whisky sign or
beer garden, just say one little prayer—"Please, God, get me
past this place,"' and then he added, 'Run like hell. That will
be cooperating with God. He will hear your prayer and the
running will be your part.'
"I did exactly as Carl told me to do. For many hours, anxious
and shaky, accompanied by my sister, I walked around the
streets of the town. Finally at eight o'clock my sister said,
'Ed, there are seven drinking joints between here and the
place where you are to attend the meeting. You go by
yourself, and if you don't make it and come home drunk we
will still love you and hope for the best, but somehow I feel
that this meeting will be different than any you ever
attended.' With God's help I got by those seven places.
"At the church entrance I happened to look around and the
sign over one of my favorite drinking places glared me
straight in the eyes. The battle to decide whether to go into
that bar or into the Alcoholics Anonymous meeting is one I
shall never forget, but a Power greater than myself pulled me
to the meeting.
"Upon entering the meeting room I was utterly astounded to
receive the firm handshake of my ex-hated friend, Carl. My
resentment toward him was disappearing. A round of
introductions began to many men in all walks of life—
doctors, lawyers, bricklayers, millwrights, coal miners,
construction workers, plasterers, laborers—all types were
there. I had been drinking with some of these men for the last
ten to twenty-five years and here they were all sober on a
Saturday night, and, above all, they were happy.
"What happened at that meeting is rather vague. All I know
is that a rebirth had taken place. I felt different deep within.
279
"Happily leaving the meeting room at midnight, I went home
with a glorious air-lifting feeling and slept peaceably for the
first time in more than five years. Upon awakening the next
morning, I recall something clearly saying to me, 'There is a
Power greater than yourself. If you will turn your will and
your life over to the care of God as you understand Him, He
will give you strength.'
"It was Sunday morning, and I decided to go to church. I
attended a service where the preacher was a man whom I had
hated from childhood. (The author wishes to comment at this
point how inevitably hate is associated with emotional and
spiritual sickness. When the mind is emptied of hate, a long
step has been taken toward recovery. Love is a tremendous
curative force.) This preacher was one of those sedate,
swallowtailed-coat-wearing Presbyterian ministers. I had no
use for him, but that was my fault. He was all right really. I
sat nervously through the singing and the collection taking.
Then the preacher read his Scripture, and his sermon was
based upon the theme, 'Never belittle anyone's experience—
he had it.' I shall never forget that sermon as long as I live. It
taught me a valuable lesson—never to belittle an experience
because someone had it, for he and God know the depth and
sincerity of that experience.
"Later I came to love this minister as one of the greatest,
most sincere men I have ever known.
"Just where my new life began is a matter that is difficult to
determine. Whether it was when I met Carl in the bar, or
wrestling past the drinking places, or at the Alcoholics
Anonymous meeting, or at the church, I do not know. But I,
who had been a hopeless alcoholic for twenty-five years,
suddenly became a sober man. I could never have done this
alone, for I had tried it a thousand times and failed. But I
drew upon a Higher Power and the Higher Power, which is
God, did it."
280
I have known the narrator of the foregoing story for several
years. Since becoming "dry" he has had to face some
difficult financial and other problems. But never once has he
weakened. In talking with him I find myself strangely
moved. It isn't what he says or even the way he says it, but
one is conscious of a power emanating from this man. He is
not a famous person. He is an everyday, hard-working
salesman, but the Higher Power is in him, flowing through
him, operating within his experience, and it transmits itself to
others. It transmitted itself to me.
This chapter is not intended as a dissertation on alcoholism,
although I will use still another reference in connection with
this problem. I cite these experiences to show conclusively
that if there is a Power able to deliver a person from
alcoholism, this same Power can help any other person to
overcome any other form of defeat he may face. There is
nothing more difficult to overcome than the problem of
alcoholism. The Power that can accomplish that difficult feat
can, I assure you, help you to overcome your difficulties
whatever they may be.
Let me give still another experience. I narrate this incident
for the same purpose, namely, to emphasize that there is a
Power which can be applied, drawn upon, and used that
mysteriously but surely gives to people who demonstrate
faith the most remarkable victories.
In the Hotel Roanoke at Roanoke, Virginia, one night a man
who has since become a good friend told me the following
story. Two years before he had read my book, A Guide to
Confident Living. At that time he was considered by himself
and by others to be an utterly hopeless alcoholic. He is a
businessman in a Virginia town and is of such ability that
despite his drinking problem he was able to keep going with
fair success. He had absolutely no control over his drinking,
however, and evident deterioration was taking place.
281
Upon reading the book above mentioned, the idea was
lodged in his mind that if he could only get to New York he
could be cured of his difficulty. He came to New York but
was dead drunk when he arrived. A friend took him to a
hotel and left him. He recovered sufficient consciousness to
call a bellboy and told him that he wanted to go to the
Townes Hospital, a famous institution for alcoholics,
presided over by the late Dr. Silkworth, one of the greatest
men in the field of alcoholism—now deceased but never to
be forgotten.
After robbing him of one hundred or more dollars which he
had in his pocket, the bellboy delivered him to the hospital.
After several days of treatment, Dr. Silkworth came in to see
him and said, "Charles, I think we have done for you all that
we can do. I have a feeling that you are well."
This was not Dr. Silkworth's usual practice, and the fact that
he handled this case in this manner causes one to sense the
guiding hand of a Higher Power.
Still somewhat shaky, Charles made his way downtown until
he found himself outside the office door of the Marble
Collegiate Church, 1 West 29th Street, New York City. It
happened to be a legal holiday and the church was closed.
(Other than such holidays the church is always open.) He
stood there hesitantly. He had hoped that he might go into
the church and pray. Not being able to gain entrance, he did a
strange thing. He took from his wallet one of his business
cards and dropped it through the mail slot in the door.
The instant he did that a tremendous wave of peace came
over him. He had an amazing sense of release. He put his
head against the door and sobbed like a baby, but he knew
that he was free, that some tremendous change had happened
to him the validity of which is attested by the fact that from
that minute on there has been no turning back. He has lived
in complete sobriety from that moment.
282
There are several features about this incident which mark it
as impressive. For one, Dr. Silkworth seemed to have
released him from the hospital at the proper psychological,
spiritual, and shall we say supernatural moment, indicating
that the doctor himself was the subject of Divine guidance.
When Charles told me this story in the Hotel Roanoke two
years after it happened, I had a feeling as he related it that I
had heard it before in precise detail. But he had never told
me this story. In fact, I had never previously talked to him. It
occurred to me that perhaps he had written the story to me
and I had read it, but he said he had never written me. I then
asked him if he had told the story to one of my secretaries,
associates, or any other person who could have related it to
me, but he said he had never told the story to any other
individual save his wife and I had not met her until that
night. Apparently this incident had been transmitted to my
subconscious at the time it happened for now I
"remembered" it.
Why did he drop the card in the mail slot? Perhaps he was
symbolically reporting to his spiritual home, reporting to
God. It was a dramatic and symbolic separation of himself
from his defeat and the turning to a Higher Power which
immediately took him out of himself and healed him.
The incident indicates that if there is deep desire, intensity of
longing, and a sincere reaching out after the Power that it
will be given.
In this chapter I have related victory stories out of human
experience each in its own way indicating the continual
presence and availability of a life-renewing Power, beyond
but resident within ourselves. Your problem may not be
alcoholism, but the tact that the Higher Power can heal a
person of this most difficult malady emphasizes the
tremendous truth related in this chapter and throughout the
entire book that there is no problem, difficulty, or defeat that
283
you cannot solve or overcome by faith, positive thinking, and
prayer to God. The techniques are simple and workable. And
God will help you always, just as the writer of the following
letter was helped.
"Dear Dr. Peale: When we think of all the wonderful things
that have happened to us since we first met you and started
coming to the Marble Church, it seems nothing short of a
miracle. When you realize that just six years ago this month I
was totally broke—in fact thousands of dollars in debt—a
complete physical washout—and had hardly a friend in the
world because of my excess drinking—you can see why we
have to pinch ourselves every now and then to realize that
our good fortune isn't all a dream.
"As you well know, alcohol wasn't the only problem I had
six years ago. It has been said that I was one of the most
negative people you ever saw. That's only a half truth. For I
was filled with gripes, all sorts of irritation, and was one of
the most supercritical, impatient, cocky individuals that you
could have possibly met even in all your travels.
"Now, please don't think I feel I have overcome all these
obsessions. I haven't. I am one of those people that have to
do a day-to-day job on myself. But gradually, by trying to
follow your teachings, I am learning to control myself and be
less critical of my fellow man. And it is like being released
from a prison. I just never dreamed that life could be so full
and wonderful. Sincerely, (Signed) Dick."
Why not draw upon that Higher Power?

284
Epilogue
YOU HAVE FINISHED this book. What have you read?
Simply a series of practical and workable techniques for
living a successful life. You have read a formula of belief
and practice which should help you win victory over every
defeat.
Examples have been given of people who have believed and
who have applied the suggested techniques. These stories
have been told to demonstrate that through the same methods
you can obtain the same results as they did. But reading is
not enough. Now please go back and persistently practice
each technique given in this book. Keep at it until you obtain
the desired results.
I wrote this book out of a sincere desire to help you. It will
give me great happiness to know that the book has helped
you. I have absolute confidence and belief in the principles
and methods outlined in this volume. They have been tested
in the laboratory of spiritual experience and practical
demonstration. They work when worked.
We may never meet in person, but in this book we have met.
We are spiritual friends. I pray for you. God will help you—
so believe and live successfully.
NORMAN VINCENT PEALE
ECKHART TOLLE

A NEW EARTH
Awakening to 
Your Life's PurposeCHAPTER ONE
THE FLOWERING OF HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS
EVOCATION
Earth, 114 million years ago, one morning just after sunrise: The first flower 
ever to appear on the planet opens up to receive the rays of the sun. Prior to 
this momentous event that heralds an evolutionary transformation in the life 
of plants, the planet had already been covered in vegetation for millions of 
years. The first flower probably did not survive for long, and flowers must 
have   remained   rare   and   isolated   phenomena,   since   conditions   were   most 
likely   not   yet   favorable   for   a   widespread   flowering   to   occur.   One   day, 
however, a critical threshold was reached, and suddenly there would have 
been an explosion of color and scent all over the planet – if a perceiving 
consciousness had been there to witness it.
Much later, those delicate and fragrant beings we call flowers would 
come to play an essential part in the evolution of consciousness of another 
species. Humans would increasingly be drawn to and fascinated by them. As 
the consciousness of human beings developed, flowers were most likely the 
first thing they came to value that had no utilitarian purpose for them, that is 
to say, was not linked in some way to survival. They provided inspiration to 
countless artists, poets, and mystics. Jesus tells us to contemplate the flowers 
and learn from then how to live. The Buddha is said to have given a “silent 
sermon” once during which he held up a flower and gazed at it. After a 
while, one of those present, a monk called Mahakasyapa, began to smile. He 
is said to have been the only one who had understood the sermon. According 
to legend, that smile (that is to say, realization) was handed down by twenty­
eight successive masters and much later became the origin of Zen.
Seeing beauty in a flower could awaken humans, however briefly, to 
the beauty that is an essential part of their own innermost being, their true 
nature. The first recognition of beauty was one of the most significant events 
in the evolution of human consciousness. The feelings of joy and love are 
intrinsically   connected   to   that   recognition.   Without   our   fully   realizing   it, 
flowers would become for us an expression in form of that which is most 
high, most sacred, and ultimately formless within ourselves. Flowers, more 
fleeting, more ethereal and more delicate than the plants out of which they 
emerged, would become like messengers from another realm, like a bridge 
between the world of physical forms and the formless. They not only had a 
scent that was delicate and pleasing to humans, but also brought a fragrance 
from the realm of spirit. Using the word “enlightenment” in a wider sense 
than the conventionally accepted one, we could look upon flowers as the 
enlightenment of plants.
Any life­form in any realm – mineral, vegetable, animal, or human – 
can be said to undergo “enlightenment.” It is, however, an extremely rare 
occurrence since it is more than an evolutionary progression: It also implies 
a discontinuity in its development, a leap to an entirely different level of 
Being and, most important, a lessening of materiality. 
What could be heavier and more impenetrable than a rock, the densest 
of   all   forms?   And   yet   some   rocks   undergo   a   change   in   their   molecular 
structure, turn into crystals, and so become transparent to the light. Some 
carbons,   under   inconceivable   heat   and   pressure,   turn   into   diamonds,   and 
some heavy minerals into other precious stones. 
Most crawling reptilians, the most earthbound of all creatures, have 
remained unchanged for millions of years. Some, however, grew feathers and 
wings and turned into birds, thus defying the force of gravity that had held 
them  for  so  long.  They  didn’t  become better  at crawling or walking, but 
transcended crawling and walking entirely.
Since time immemorial, flowers, crystals, precious stones, and birds 
have held special significance for the human spirit. Like all life­forms, they 
are,   of   course,   temporary   manifestations   of   the   underlying   one   Life,   one 
Consciousness. Their special significance and the reason why humans feel 
such fascination for and affinity with them can be attributed to their ethereal 
quality.
Once there is a certain degree of presence, of still and alert attention 
in human beings’ perceptions, they can sense the divine life essence, the one 
indwelling   consciousness   or   spirit   in   every   creature,   every   life­form, 
recognize it as one with their own essence and so love it as themselves. Until 
this happens, however, most humans see only the outer forms, unaware of the 
inner essence, just as they are unaware of their own essence and identify only 
with their own physical and psychological form.
 
In the case of a flower, a crystal, precious stone, or bird, however, even 
someone with little or no Presence can occasionally sense that there is more 
than the mere physical existence of that form, without knowing that this is 
the reason why he or she is drawn toward it, feels an affinity with it. Because 
of   its   ethereal   nature,   its   form   obscures   the   indwelling   spirit   to   a   lesser 
degree than is the case with other life­forms. The exception to this are all 
newborn life­forms – babies, puppies, kittens, lambs, and so on. They are 
fragile, delicate, not yet firmly established in materiality. An innocence, a 
sweetness and beauty that are not of this world still shine through them. 
They delight even relatively insensitive humans. 
So   when   you   are   alert   and   contemplate   a   flower,   crystal,   or   bird 
without naming it mentally, it becomes a window for you into the formless. 
There is an inner opening, however slight, into the realm of spirit. This is 
why these three “en­lightened” life­forms have played such an important part 
in   the   evolution   of   human   consciousness   since   ancient   times;   why,   for 
example, the jewel in the lotus flower is a central symbol of Buddhism and a 
white bird, the dove, signifies the Holy Spirit in Christianity. They have been 
preparing the ground for a more profound shift in planetary consciousness 
that   is   destined   to   take  place  in  the   human  species.  This  is  the  spiritual 
awakening that we are beginning to witness now. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK
Is   humanity   ready   for   a   transformation   of   consciousness,   an   inner 
flowering   so   radical   and   profound   that   compared   to   it   the   flowering   of 
plants, no matter how beautiful, is only a pale reflection? Can human beings 
lose   the   density   of   their   conditioned   mind   structures   and   become   like 
crystals   or   precious   stones,   so   to   speak,   transparent   to   the   light   of 
consciousness?   Can   they   defy   the   gravitational   pull   of   materialism   and 
materiality   and   rise   above  identification  with form   that  keeps  the ego  in 
place and condemns them to imprisonment within their own personality?
The possibility of such a transformation has been the central message 
of the great wisdom teachings of humankind. The messengers – Buddha, 
Jesus, and others, not all of them known – were humanity’s early flowers. 
They were precursors, rare and precious beings. A widespread flowering was 
not   yet   possible   at   that   time,   and   their   message   became   largely 
misunderstood   and   often   greatly   distorted.   It   certainly   did   not   transform 
human behavior, except in a small minority of people.
Is humanity more ready now than at the time of those early teachers? 
Why should this be so? What can you do, if anything, to bring about or 
accelerate this inner shift? What is it that characterizes the old egoic state of 
consciousness,   and   by   what   signs   is   the   new   emerging   consciousness 
recognized? These and other essential questions will be addressed in this 
book. More important, this book itself is a transformational device that has 
come   out   of   the   arising   new   consciousness.   The   ideas   and   concepts 
presented here may be important, but they are secondary. They are no more 
than  signposts pointing toward awakening. As you read, a shift takes place 
within you. 
This book’s main purpose is not to add new information or beliefs to 
your mind or to try to convince you of anything, but to bring about a shift in 
consciousness;   that   is   to   say,   to   awaken.   In   that   sense,   this   book   is   not 
“interesting”.   Interesting   means   you   can   keep   your   distance,   play   around 
with ideas and concepts in your mind, agree or disagree. This book is about 
you. It will change your state of consciousness or it will be meaningless. It 
can only awaken those who are ready. Not everyone is ready yet, but many 
are, and with each person who awakens, the momentum in the collective 
consciousness grows, and it becomes easier for others. If you don’t know 
what awakening means, read on. Only by awakening can you know the true 
meaning of that word. A glimpse is enough to initiate the awakening process, 
which is irreversible. For some, that glimpse will come while reading this 
book. For many others who may not even have realized it, the process has 
already begun. This book will help them recognize it. For some, it may have 
begun through loss or suffering; for others, through coming into contact with 
a spiritual teacher or teaching, through reading The Power of Now or some 
other   spiritually   alive   and   therefore   transformational   book   –   or   any 
combination of the above. If the awakening process has begun in you , the 
reading of this book will accelerate and intensify it. 
An   essential   part   of   the   awakening   is   the   recognition   of   the 
unawakened   you,   the   ego   as   it   thinks,   speaks   and   acts,   as   well   as   the 
recognition of the collectively conditioned mental processes that perpetuate 
the unawakened state. That is why this book shows the main aspects of the 
ego and how they operate in the individual as well as in the collective. This 
is important for two related reasons: The first is that unless you know the 
basic mechanics behind the workings of the ego, you won’t recognize it, and 
it will trick you into identifying with it again and again. This means it takes 
you over, an impostor pretending to be you. The second reason is that the act 
of recognition itself is one of the ways in which awakening happens. When 
you recognize the unconsciousness in you, that which makes the recognition 
possible is the arising consciousness, is awakening. You cannot fight against 
the  ego   and   win,   just  as   you cannot   fight   against   darkness.   The  light  of 
consciousness is all that is necessary. You are that light. 
OUR INHERITED DYSFUNCTION
If we look more deeply into humanity’s ancient religions and spiritual 
traditions, we will find that underneath the many surface differences there 
are two core insights that most of them agree on. The words they use to 
describe those insights differ, yet they all point to a twofold fundamental 
truth. The first part of this truth is the realization that the “normal” state of 
mind of most human beings contains a strong element of what we might call 
dysfunction or even madness. Certain teachings at the heart of Hinduism 
perhaps   come   closest   to   seeing   this   dysfunction   as   a   form   of   collective 
mental illness. They call it  maya,  the veil of delusion. Ramana Maharshi, 
one of the greatest Indian sages, bluntly states: “The mind is maya.”
Buddhism uses different terms. According to the Buddha, the human 
mind   in   its   normal   state   generates  dukkha,   which   can   be   translated   as 
suffering,   unsatisfactoriness,   or   just   plain   misery.   He   sees   it   as   a 
characteristic of the human condition. Wherever you go, whatever you do, 
says the Buddha, you will encounter  dukkha,  and it will manifest in every 
situation sooner or later.
According   to   Christian   teachings,   the   normal   collective   state   of 
humanity   is   one   of   “original   sin.”  Sin  is   a   word   that   has   been   greatly 
misunderstood   and   misinterpreted.   Literally   translated   from   the   ancient 
Greek in which the New Testament was written, to sin means to miss the 
mark, as an archer who misses the target, so to sin means to miss the point of 
human existence. It means to live unskillfully, blindly, and thus to suffer and 
cause   suffering.   Again,   the   term,   stripped   of   its   cultural   baggage   and 
misinterpretations,   points   to   the   dysfunction   inherent   in   the   human 
condition.
The   achievements   of   humanity   are   impressive   and   undeniable.   We 
have created sublime works of music, literature, painting, architecture, and 
sculpture. More recently, science and technology have brought about radical 
changes in the way we live and have enabled us to do and create things that 
would have been considered miraculous even two hundred years ago. No 
doubt:   The   human   mind   is   highly   intelligent.   Yet   its   very   intelligence   is 
tainted by madness. Science and technology have magnified the destructive 
impact that the dysfunction of the human mind has upon the planet, other 
life­forms,   and   upon   humans   themselves.   That   is   why   the   history   of   the 
twentieth century is where that dysfunction, that collective insanity, can be 
most clearly recognized. A further factor is that this dysfunction is actually 
intensifying and accelerating. 
The First World War broke out in 1914. Destructive and cruel wars, 
motivated   by   fear,   greed,   and   the   desire   for   power,   had   been   common 
occurrences   throughout   human   history,   as   had   slavery,   torture,   and 
widespread violence inflicted for religious and ideological reasons. Humans 
suffered more at the hands of each other than through natural disasters. By 
the year 1914, however, the highly intelligent human mind had invented not 
only   the   internal   combustion   engine,   but   also   bombs,   machine   guns, 
submarines, flame throwers, and poison gas. Intelligence in the service of 
madness! In static trench warfare in France and Belgium, millions of men 
perished to gain a few miles of mud. When the war was over in 1918, the 
survivors   look   in   horror   and   incomprehension   upon   the   devastation   left 
behind:   ten   million   human   beings   killed   and   many   more   maimed   or 
disfigured.   Never   before   had   human   madness   been   so   destructive   in   its 
effect,   so   clearly   visible.   Little   did   they   know   that   this   was   only   the 
beginning. 
By the end of the century, the number of people who died a violent 
death   at   the   hand   of   their   fellow   humans   would   rise   to   more   than   one 
hundred million. They died not only through wars between nations, but also 
through mass exterminations and genocide, such as the murder of twenty 
million “class enemies, spies, and traitors” in the Soviet Union under Stalin 
or the unspeakable horrors of the Holocaust in Nazi Germany. They also 
died in countless smaller internal conflicts, such as the Spanish civil war or 
during   the   Khmer   Rouge   regime   in   Cambodia   when   a   quarter   of   that 
country’s population was murdered.
We only need to watch the daily news on television to realize that the 
madness   has   not   abated,   that   is   continuing   into   the   twenty­first   century. 
Another   aspect   of   the   collective   dysfunction   of   the   human   mind   is   the 
unprecedented violence that humans are inflicting on other life­forms and 
the planet itself – the destruction of oxygen­producing forests and other plant 
and animal life; ill­treatment of animals in factory farms; and poisoning of 
rivers, oceans, and air. Driven by greed, ignorant of their connectedness to 
the whole, humans persist in behavior that, if continued unchecked, can only 
result in their own destruction.
The collective manifestations of the insanity that lies at the heart of 
the human condition constitute the greater part of human history. It is to a 
large extent a history of madness. If the history of humanity were the clinical 
case   history   of   a   single   human   being,   the   diagnosis   would   have   to   be: 
chronic paranoid delusions, a pathological propensity to commit murder and 
acts of extreme violence and cruelty against his perceived “enemies” – his 
own unconsciousness projected outward. Criminally insane, with a few brief 
lucid intervals. 
Fear, greed, and the desire for power are the psychological motivating 
forces   not   only   behind   warfare   and   violence   between   nations,   tribes, 
religions, and ideologies, but also the cause of incessant conflict in personal 
relationships.   They   bring   about   a   distortion   in   your   perception   of   other 
people and yourself. Through them, you misinterpret every situation, leading 
to misguided action designed to rid you of fear and satisfy your need for 
more, a bottomless hole that can never be filled.
It is important to realize, however, that fear, greed, and the desire for 
power are not the dysfunction that we are speaking of but are themselves 
created by the dysfunction which is a deep­seated collective delusion that 
lies within the mind of each human being. A number of spiritual teachings 
tell us to let go of fear and desire. But those spiritual practices are usually 
unsuccessful. They haven’t gone to the root of the dysfunction. Fear, greed, 
and desire for power are not the ultimate causal factors. Trying to become a 
good or better human being sounds like a commendable and high­minded 
thing to do, yet it is an endeavor you cannot ultimately succeed in unless 
there is a shift in consciousness. This is because it is still part of the same 
dysfunction, a more subtle and rarefied form of self­enhancement, of desire 
for more and a strengthening of one’s conceptual identity, one’s self­image. 
You do not become good by trying to be good, but by finding the goodness 
that is already within you, and allowing that goodness to emerge. But it can 
only   emerge   if   something   fundamental   changes   in   your   state   of 
consciousness. 
The   history   of   Communism,   originally   inspired   by   noble   ideals, 
clearly   illustrates   what   happens   when   people   attempt   to   change   external 
reality – create a new earth – without any prior change in their inner reality, 
their state of consciousness. They make plans without taking into account 
the blueprint for dysfunction that every human being carries within: the ego.
THE ARISING NEW CONSCIOUSNESS
Most   ancient   religions   and   spiritual   traditions   share   the   common 
insight – that our “normal” state of mind is marred by a fundamental defect. 
However, out of this insight into the nature of the human condition – we may 
call   it   the   bad   news   –   arises   a   second   insight:   the   good   news   of   the 
possibility  of  a  radical  transformation of human consciousness. In Hindu 
teachings (and sometimes in Buddhism also), this transformation is called 
enlightenment. In the teachings of Jesus, it is salvation, and in Buddhism, it 
is  the end of suffering. Liberation  and  awakening  are other terms used to 
describe this transformation. 
The greatest achievement of humanity is not its works of art, science, 
or technology, but the recognition of its own dysfunction, its own madness. 
In the distant past, this recognition already came to a few individuals. A man 
called Gautama Siddhartha, who lived 2,600 years ago in India, was perhaps 
the   first   who   saw   it   with   absolute   clarity.   Later   the   title   Buddha   was 
conferred upon him.  Buddha  means “the awakened one.” At abut the same 
time, another of humanity’s early awakened teachers emerged in China. His 
name was Lao Tzu. He left a record of his teaching in the form of one of the 
most profound spiritual books ever written, the Tao Te Ching. 
To recognize one’s own insanity, is of course, the arising of sanity, the 
beginning of healing and transcendence. A new dimension of consciousness 
had begun to emerge on the planet, a first tentative flowering. Those rare 
individuals   then   spoke   to   their   contemporaries.   They   spoke   of   sin,   of 
suffering, of delusion. They said, “Look how you live. See what you are 
doing,   the   suffering   you   create.”   They   then   pointed   to   the   possibility   of 
awakening from the collective nightmare of “normal” human existence. They 
showed the way.
The world was not yet ready for them, and yet they were a vital and 
necessary   part   of   human   awakening.   Inevitably,   they   were   mostly 
misunderstood   by   their   contemporaries,   as   well   as   by   subsequent 
generations.  Their  teachings, although both simple and powerful, became 
distorted and misinterpreted, in some cases even as they were recorded in 
writing by their disciples. Over the centuries, many things were added that 
had   nothing   to   do   with   the   original   teachings,   but   were   reflections   of   a 
fundamental misunderstanding. Some of the teachers were ridiculed, reviled, 
or killed; others came to be worshipped as gods. Teachings that pointed the 
way beyond the dysfunction o the human mind, the way out of the collective 
insanity, were distorted and became themselves part of the insanity. 
And   so   religions,   to   a   large   extent,   became   divisive   rather   than 
unifying forces. Instead of bringing about an ending of violence and hatred 
through a realization of the fundamental oneness of all life, they brought 
more violence and hatred, more divisions between people as well as between 
different   religions   and   even   withing   the   same   religion.   They   became 
ideologies, belief  systems people could identify with and so use them to 
enhance their false sense of self. Through them, they could make themselves 
“right”   and   others   “wrong”   and   thus   define   their   identity   through   their 
enemies,   the   “others,”   the   “nonbelievers”   or   “wrong   believers”   who   not 
infrequently they saw themselves justified in killing. Man made “God” in his 
own   image.   The   eternal,   the   infinite,   and   unnameable   was   reduced   to   a 
mental idol that you had to believe in and worship as “my god” or “our god.”
And yet… and yet… in spite of all the insane deeds perpetrated in the 
name of religion, the Truth to which they point still shines at their core. It 
still   shines,   however   dimly,   through   layers   upon   layers   of   distortion   and 
misinterpretation. It is unlikely, however, that you will be able to perceive it 
there   unless   you   have   at   least   already   had   glimpse   of   that   Truth   within 
yourself. Throughout history, there have always been rare individuals who 
experienced a shift in consciousness and so realized within themselves that 
toward which all religions point. To describe that non­conceptual Truth, they 
then used the conceptual framework of their own religions. 
Through   some   of   those   men   and   women,   “schools”   or   movements 
developed within all major religions that represented not only a rediscovery, 
but in some cases an intensification of the light of the original teaching. This 
is how Gnosticism and mysticism came into existence in early and medieval 
Christianity,   Sufism   in   the   Islamic   religion,   Hasidism   and   Kabbala   in 
Judaism, Advaita Vedanta in Hinduism, Zen and Dzogchen in Buddhism. 
Most of these schools were iconoclastic. They did away with layers upon 
layers of deadening conceptualization and mental belief structures, and for 
this reason most of them were viewed with suspicion and often hostility by 
the   established   religious   hierarchies.   Unlike   mainstream   religion,   their 
teachings   emphasized   realization   and   inner   transformation.   It   is   through 
those esoteric schools or movements that the major religions regained the 
transformative power of the original teachings, although in most cases, only 
a small minority of people had access to them. Their numbers were never 
large   enough   to   have   any   significant   impact   on   the   deep   collective 
unconsciousness   of   the   majority.   Over   time,   some   of   those   schools 
themselves   became   too   rigidly   formalized   or   conceptualized   to   remain 
effective.
SPIRITUALITY AND RELIGION
What is the role o the established religions in the arising of the new 
consciousness? Many people are already aware of the difference between 
spirituality and religion. They realize that having a belief system­ a set of 
thoughts that you regard as the absolute truth – does not make you spiritual 
no matter what the nature of those beliefs is. In fact, the more you make your 
thoughts   (beliefs)   into   your   identity,   the   more   cut   off   you   are   from   the 
spiritual  dimension within yourself. Many “religious” people are stuck at 
that   level.   They   equate   truth   with   thought,   and   as   they   are   completely 
identified with thought (their mind), they claim to be in sole possession of 
the  truth  in   a  n   unconscious attempt to protect  their identity. They don’t 
realize the limitations of thought. Unless you believe (think) exactly as they 
do, you are wrong in their eyes, and in the not­too­distant past, they would 
have felt justified in killing you for that. And some still do, even now. 
The new spirituality, the transformation of consciousness, is arising to 
a   large   extent   outside   of   the   structures   of   the   existing   institutionalized 
religions. There were always pockets of spirituality even in mind­dominated 
religions, although the institutionalized hierarchies felt threatened by them 
and   often   tried   to   suppress   them.   A   large­scale   opening   of   spirituality 
outside of the religious structures is an entirely new development. In the 
past, this would have been inconceivable, especially in the West, the most 
mind­dominated  of all  cultures, where the Christian church had a virtual 
franchise on spirituality. You couldn’t just stand up and give a spiritual talk 
or publish a spiritual book unless you were sanctioned by the church, and if 
you were not, they would quickly silence you. But now, even within certain 
churches and religions, there are signs of change. It is heartwarming, and one 
is grateful for even the slightest signs of openness, such as Pope John Paul II 
visiting a mosque as well as a synagogue.
Partly as a result of the spiritual teachings that have arisen outside the 
established religions, but also due to an influx of the ancient Eastern wisdom 
teachings, a growing number of followers of traditional religions are able to 
let   go   of   identification   with   form,   dogma,   and   rigid   belief   systems   and 
discover the original depth that is hidden within their own spiritual tradition 
at the same time as they discover the depth within themselves. They realize 
that how “spiritual” you are has nothing to do with what you believe but 
everything to do with your state of consciousness. This, in turn, determines 
how you act in the world and interact with others. 
Those   unable   to   look   beyond   form   become   even   more   deeply 
entrenched in their beliefs, that is to say, in their mind. We are witnessing not 
only   an   unprecedented   influx   of   consciousness   at   this   time   but   also   an 
entrenchment and intensification of the ego. Some religious institutions will 
be   open   to   the   new   consciousness;   others   will   harden   their   doctrinal 
positions and become part of all those other man­made structures through 
which the collective ego will defend itself and “fight back.” Some churches, 
sects, cults, or religious movements are basically collective egoic entities, as 
rigidly identified with their mental positions as the followers of any political 
ideology that is closed to any alternative interpretation of reality.
But   the   ego   is   destined   to   dissolve,   and   all   its   ossified   structures, 
whether they be religious or other institutions, corporations, or governments, 
will disintegrate from within, no matter how deeply entrenched they appear 
to be. The most rigid structures, the most impervious to change, will collapse 
first. This has already happened in the case of Soviet Communism. How 
deeply entrenched, how solid and monolithic it appeared, and yet within a 
few years, it disintegrated from within. No one foresaw this. All were taken 
by surprise. There are many more such surprises in store for us.
THE URGENCY OF TRANSFORMATION
When faced with a radical crisis, when the old way of being in the 
world, of interacting with each other and with the realm of nature doesn’t 
work   anymore,   when   survival  is  threatened by seemingly insurmountable 
problems, an individual life­form – or a species – will either die or become 
extinct or rise above the limitations of its condition through an evolutionary 
leap.
It is believed that the life­forms on this planet first evolved in the sea. 
When there were no animals yet to be found on land, the sea was already 
teeming with life. Then at some point, one of the sea creatures must have 
started to venture onto dry land. It would perhaps crawl a few inches at first, 
then exhausted by the enormous gravitational pull of the planet, it would 
return to the water, where gravity is almost nonexistent and where it could 
live with much greater ease. And then it tried again and again and again, and 
much later would adapt to life on land, grow feet instead of fins, develop 
lungs instead of gills. It seems unlikely that a species would venture into 
such   an   alien   environment   and   undergo   an   evolutionary   transformation 
unless it was compelled to do so by some crisis situation. There may have 
been a large sea area that got cut off from the main ocean where the water 
gradually receded over thousands of years, forcing fish to leave their habitat 
and evolve.
Responding to a radical crisis that threatens our very survival – this is 
humanity’s   challenge   now.   The   dysfunction   of   the   egoic   human   mind, 
recognized   already   more   than   2,500   years   ago   by   the   ancient   wisdom 
teachers and now magnified through science and technology, is for the first 
time   threatening   the   survival   of   the   planet.   Until   very   recently,   the 
transformation   of   human   consciousness   –   also   pointed   to   by   the   ancient 
teachers – was no more than a possibility, realized by a few rare individuals 
here   and   there,   irrespective   of   cultural   or   religious   background.   A 
widespread flowering of human consciousness did not happen because it was 
not yet imperative. 
A significant portion of the earth’s population will soon recognize, if 
they haven’t already done so, that humanity is now faced with a stark choice: 
Evolve   or   die.   A   still   relatively   small   but   rapidly   growing   percentage   of 
humanity is already experiencing within themselves the breakup of the old 
egoic   mind   patterns   and   the   emergence   of     a   new   dimension   of 
consciousness.
What   is   arising   now   is   not   a   new   belief   system,   a   new   religion, 
spiritual   ideology,   or   mythology.   We   are   coming   to   the   end   not   only   of 
mythologies   but   also   of   ideologies   and   belief   systems.   The   change   goes 
deeper than the content of your mind, deeper than your thoughts. In fact, at 
the   heart   of   the   new   consciousness   is   the   transcendence   of   thought,   the 
newfound ability of rising above thought, of realizing a dimension within 
yourself that is infinitely more vast than thought. You then no longer derive 
your   identity,   your   sense   of   who   you   are,   from   the   incessant   stream   of 
thinking   that   in   the   old   consciousness   you   take   to   be   yourself.   What   a 
liberation to realize that the “voice in my head” is not who I am. Who am I 
then? The one who sees that. The awareness that is prior to thought, the 
space in which the thought – or the emotion or sense perception – happens.
Ego is no more than this: identification with form, which primarily 
means thought forms. If evil has any reality – and it has a relative, not an 
absolute,   reality   –   this   is   also   its   definition:  complete  identification  with 
form – physical forms, thought forms, emotional forms. This results in a total 
unawareness of my connectedness with the whole, my intrinsic oneness with 
every “other” as well as with the Source. This forgetfulness is original sin, 
suffering, delusion. When this delusion of utter separateness underlies and 
governs whatever I think, say, and do, what kind of world do I create? To 
find the answer to this, observe how humans relate to each other, read a 
history book, or watch the news on television tonight.
If the structures of the human mind remain unchanged, we will always 
end up re­creating fundamentally the same world, the same evils, the same 
dysfunction.
A NEW HEAVEN AND A NEW EARTH
The inspiration for the title of this book came from a Bible prophecy 
that seems more applicable now than at any other time in human history. It 
occurs in both the Old and the New Testament and speaks of the collapse of 
the existing world order and the arising of “a new heaven and a new earth.”1 
We need to understand here that heaven is not a location but refers to the 
inner realm of consciousness. This is the esoteric meaning of the word, and 
this is also its meaning in the teachings of Jesus. Earth, on the other hand, is 
the outer manifestation in form, which is always a reflection of the inner. 
Collective   human   consciousness   and   life   on   our   planet   are   intrinsically 
connected.  “A   new   heaven”   is   the   emergence   of   a   transformed   state   of  
human consciousness, and “a new earth” is its reflection in the physical  
realm. Since human life and human consciousness are intrinsically one with 
the life of the planet, as the old consciousness dissolves, there are bound to 
be synchronistic geographic and climatic natural upheavals in many parts of 
the planet, some of which we are already witnessing now. 
CHAPTER TWO
EGO: THE CURRENT STATE OF HUMANITY
Words,   no   matter   whether   they   are   vocalized   and   made   into   sounds   or 
remain unspoken as thoughts, can cast an almost hypnotic spell upon you. 
You   easily   lose   yourself   in   them,   become   hypnotized   into   implicitly 
believing that when you have attached a word to something, you know what 
it is. The fact is: You don’t know what it is. You have only covered up the 
mystery with a label. Everything, a bird, a tree, even a simple stone, and 
certainly a human being, is ultimately unknowable. This is because it has 
unfathomable  depth.   All   we can perceive, experience, think about, is the 
surface layer of reality, less than the tip of an iceberg. 
Underneath the surface appearance, everything is not only connected 
with everything else, but also with the Source of all life out of which it 
came. Even a stone, and more easily a flower or a bird, could show you the 
way back to God, to the Source, to yourself. When you look at it or hold it 
and let it be without imposing a word or mental label on it, a sense of awe, of 
wonder, arises within you. Its essence silently communicates itself to you 
and reflects your own essence back to you. This is what great artists sense 
and succeed in conveying in their art. Van Gogh didn’t say: “That’s just an 
old chair.” He looked, and looked, and looked. He sensed the Beingness of 
the chair. Then he sat in front of the canvas and took up the brush. The chair 
itself would have sold for the equivalent of a few dollars. The painting of that 
same chair today would fetch in excess of $25 million. 
When you don’t cover up the world with words and labels, a sense of 
the   miraculous   returns   to   your   life   that   was   lost   a   long   time   ago   when 
humanity, instead of using thought, became possessed by thought. A depth 
returns to your life. Things regain their newness, their freshness. And the 
greatest miracle is the experiencing of your essential self as prior to any 
words, thoughts, mental labels, and images. For this to happen, you need to 
disentangle your sense of I, of Beingness, from all the things it has become 
mixed up with, that is to say, identified with. That disentanglement is what 
this book is about.
The quicker you are in attaching verbal or mental labels to things, 
people, or situations, the more shallow and lifeless your reality becomes, and 
the   more   deadened   you   become   to   reality,   the   miracle   of   life   that 
continuously unfolds within and around you. In this way, cleverness may be 
gained, but wisdom is lost, and so are joy, love, creativity, and aliveness. 
They   are   concealed   in   the   still   gap   between   the   perception   and   the 
interpretation. Of course we have to use words and thoughts. They have their 
own beauty – but do we need to become imprisoned in them?
Words reduce reality to something the human mind can grasp, which 
isn’t very much. Language consists of five basic sounds produced by the 
vocal   cords.   They   are   the   vowels  a,   e,   i,   o,   u.   The   other   sounds   are 
consonants produced by air pressure:  s, f, g,  and so forth. Do you believe 
some combination of such basic sounds could ever explain who you are, or 
the ultimate purpose of the universe, or even what a tree or stone is in its 
depth?
THE ILLUSORY SELF
The word “I” embodies the greatest error and the deepest truth, depending 
on   how  it   is  used.   In   conventional  usage, it is not only one of the most 
frequently   used   words   in   the   language   (together   with   the   related   words: 
“me,” “my,” “mine,” and “myself”) but also one of the most misleading. In 
normal everyday usage, “I” embodies the primordial error, a misperception 
of who you are, an illusory sense of identity. This is the ego. This illusory 
sense of self is what Albert Einstein, who had deep insights not only in to 
the reality of space and time but also into human nature, referred to as “an 
optical illusion of consciousness.” That illusory self then becomes the basis 
for   all   further   interpretations,   or   rather   misinterpretations   of   reality,   all 
thought  processes, interactions, and relationships. Your  reality becomes a 
reflection of the original illusion.
The   good   news   is:   If   you   can   recognize   illusion   as   illusion,   it 
dissolves. The recognition of illusion is also its ending. Its survival depends 
on your mistaking it for reality. In the seeing of who you are not, the reality 
of who you are emerges by itself. This is what happens as you slowly and 
carefully read this and the next chapter, which are about the mechanics of the 
false self we call the ego. So what is the nature of this illusory self?
What you usually refer to when you say “I” is not who you are. By a 
monstrous act of reductionism, the infinite depth of who you are is confused 
with a sound produced by the vocal cords or the thought of “I” in your mind 
and whatever the “I” has identified with. So what do the usual “I” and the 
related “me,” “my,” or “mine” refer to?
When a young child learns that a sequence o sounds produced by the 
parents’ vocal cords is his or her name, the child begins to equate a word, 
which in the mind becomes a thought, with who he or she is. At that stage, 
some children refer to themselves in the third person. “Johnny is hungry.” 
Soon after, they learn the magic word “I” and equate it with their name, 
which they have already equated with who they are. Then other thoughts 
come and merge with the original I­thought. The next step are thoughts of 
me   and   mine   to   designate   things   that   are   somehow   part   of   “I.”   This   is 
identification   with   objects,   which   means   investing  things,  but   ultimately 
thoughts   that   represent   things,   with   a   sense   of   self,   thereby   deriving   an 
identity   from   them.   When   “my”   toy   breaks   or   is   taken   away,   intense 
suffering arises. Not because of any intrinsic value that the toy has – the 
child will soon lose interest in it, and it will be replaced by other toys, other 
objects – but because of the thought of “mine”. The toy became part of the 
child’s developing sense of self, of “I.”
And   so  as  the  child   grows up, the original I­thought  attracts other 
thoughts   to   itself:   It   becomes   identified   with   a   gender,   possessions,   the 
sense­perceived body, a nationality, race, religion, profession. Other things 
the “I” identifies with are roles – mother, father, husband, wife, and so on – 
accumulated knowledge or opinions, likes and dislikes, and also things that 
happened to “me” in the past, the memory of which are thoughts that further 
define my sense of self as “me and my story.” These are only some of the 
things people derive their  sense of identity form. They are ultimately no 
more than thoughts held together precariously by the fact that they are all 
invested with a sense of self. This mental construct is what you normally 
refer to when you say “I.” To be more precise: Most of the time it is not you 
who   speaks   when   you   say   or   think   “I”   but   some   aspect   of   that   mental 
construct, the egoic self. Once you awaken, you still use the word “I,” but it 
will come from a much deeper place within yourself.
Most people are still completely identified with the incessant stream 
of mind, of compulsive thinking, most of it repetitive and pointless. There is 
no  “I” apart  from  their thought processes and the emotions that go with 
them. This is the meaning of being spiritually unconscious. When told that 
there  is a voice in  their head that  never stops speaking, they say, “What 
voice?” or angrily deny it, which of course is the voice, is the thinker, is the 
unobserved mind. It could almost be looked upon as an entity that has taken 
possession of them.
Some  people  never   forget  the  first  tie  they  disidentified from   their 
thoughts and thus briefly experienced the shift in identity from being the 
content of their mind to being the awareness in the background. For others it 
happens in such a subtle way they hardly notice it, or they just notice an 
influx of joy or inner peace without knowing the reason.
THE VOICE IN THE HEAD
That first glimpse of awareness came to me when I was a first­year 
student at the University of London. I would take the tube (subway) twice a 
week   to   go   to   the   university   library,   usually   around   nine   o’clock   in   the 
morning, toward the end of the rush hour. One time a woman in her early 
thirties sat opposite me. I had seen her before a few times on that train. One 
could not help but notice her. Although the train was full, the seats on either 
side of her were unoccupied, the reason being, no doubt, that she appeared to 
be quite insane. She looked extremely tense and talked to herself incessantly 
in a loud and angry voice. She was so absorbed in her thoughts that she was 
totally unaware, in seemed, of other people or her surroundings. Her head 
was   facing   downward   and   slightly   to   the   left,   as   if   she   were   addressing 
someone sitting in the empty seat next to her. Although I don’t remember the 
precise content, her monologue went something like this: “And then she said 
to me… so I said to her you are a liar how dare you accuse me of… when 
you are the one who has always taken advantage of me I trusted you and you 
betrayed my trust…” There was the angry tone in her voice of someone who 
has   been   wronged,   who   needs   to   defend   her   position   lest   she   become 
annihilated. 
As the train approached Tottenham Court Road Station, she stood up 
and   walked   toward   the   door   with   still   no   break   in   the   stream   of   words 
coming out of her mouth. That was my stop too, so I got off behind her. At 
street level, she began to walk toward Bedford Square, still engaged in her 
imaginary   dialogue,   still   angrily  accusing and  asserting her  position. My 
curiosity aroused, I decided to follow her as long as she was walking in the 
same general direction I had to go in. Although engrossed in her imaginary 
dialogue, she seemed to know where she was going. Soon we were within 
sight   of   the   imposing   structure   of   Senate   House,   a   1930’s   high­rise,   the 
university’s central administrative building and library. I was shocked. Was it 
possible that we were going to the same place? Yes, that’s’ where she was 
heading. Was she a teacher, student, an office worker, a librarian? Maybe she 
was some psychologist’s research project. I never knew the answer. I walked 
twenty   steps   behind   her,   and   by   the   time   I   entered   the   building   (which 
ironically was the location of the headquarters of the “Mind Police” in the 
film   version   of   George   Orwell’s   novel,  1984),   she   had   already   been 
swallowed up by one of the elevators. 
I was somewhat taken aback by what I had just witnessed. A mature 
first­year   student   at   twenty­five,   I   saw   myself   as   an   intellectual   in   the 
making, and I was convinced that all the answers to the dilemmas of human 
existence could be found through the intellect, that is to say, by thinking. I 
didn’t realize yet that thinking without awareness  is  the main dilemma of 
human   existence.   I   looked   upon  the  professors   as   sages  who  had  all   the 
answers and upon the university as the temple of knowledge. How could an 
insane person like her be part of this?
I was still thinking about her when I was in the men’s room prior to 
entering the library. As I was washing my hands, I thought: I hope I don’t 
end up like her. The man next to me looked briefly in my direction, and I 
suddenly was shocked when I realized that I hadn’t just thought those words, 
but mumbled them aloud. “Oh my God, I’m already like her,” I thought. 
Wasn’t   my   mind   as   incessantly   active   as   hers?   There   were   only   minor 
differences   between   us.   The   predominant   underlying   emotion   behind   her 
thinking seemed to be anger. In my case, it was mostly anxiety. She thought 
out loud. I thought – mostly – in my head. If she was mad, then everyone 
was mad, including myself. There were differences in degree only.
For a moment, I was able to stand back from my own mind and see it 
from a deeper perspective, as it were. There was a brief shift from thinking 
to awareness. I was still in the men’s room, but alone now, looking at my 
face in the mirror. At that moment of detachment from my mind, I laughed 
out loud. It may have sounded insane, but it was the laughter of sanity, the 
laughter of the big­bellied Buddha. “Life isn’t as serious as my mind makes 
it out to be.” That’s what the laughter seemed to be saying. But it was only a 
glimpse, very quickly to be forgotten. I would spend the next three years in 
anxiety and depression, completely identified with my mind. I had to get 
close to suicide before awareness returned, and then it was much more than a 
glimpse. I became free of compulsive thinking and of the false, mind­made 
“I.”
The above incident not only gave me a first glimpse of  awareness, it 
also planted the first doubt as to the absolute validity of the human intellect. 
A few months later, something tragic happened that made my doubt row. On 
a Monday morning, we arrived for a lecture to be given by a professor whose 
mind I admired greatly, only to be told that sadly he had committed suicide 
sometime during the weekend by shooting himself. I was stunned. He was a 
highly  respected  teacher  and seemed to have all  the answers. However, I 
could as yet see no alternative to the cultivation of thought. I didn’t realize 
yet that thinking is only a tiny aspect of the consciousness that we are, nor 
did I know anything about the ego, let alone being able to detect it within 
myself.
CONTENT AND STRUCTURE OF THE EGO
The egoic mind is completely conditioned by the past. Its conditioning 
is twofold: It consists of content and structure. 
In the case of a child who cries in deep suffering because his toy has 
been taken away, the toy represents content. It is interchangeable with any 
other   content,   any   other   toy   or   object.   The   content   you   identify   with   is 
conditioned by your environment, your upbringing, and surrounding culture. 
Whether the child is rich or poor, whether the toy is a piece of wood shaped 
like an animal or a sophisticated electronic gadget makes no difference as far 
as the suffering caused by its loss is concerned. The reason why such acute 
suffering   occurs  is  concealed in the  word “my,” and it  is structural. The 
unconscious compulsion to enhance one’s identity through association with 
an object is built into the very structure of the egoic mind. 
One of the most basic mind structures through which the ego comes 
into existence is identification. The word “identification” is derived from the 
Latin word  idem,  meaning “same” and  facere, which means “to make.” So 
when I identify with something, I “make it the same.” The same as what? 
The same as I. I endow it with a sense of self, and so it becomes part of my 
“identity.” One of the most basic levels of identification is with things: My 
toy later becomes my car, my house, my clothes, and so on. I try to find 
myself in things but never quite make it and end up losing myself in them. 
That is the fate of the ego.
IDENTIFICATION WITH THINGS
The people in the advertising industry know very well that in order to 
sell things that people don’t really need, they must convince them that those 
things will add something to how they see themselves or are seen by others; 
in   other   words,   add   something   to   their   sense   of   self.   They   do   this,   for 
example, by telling you that you will stand out from the crowd by using this 
product and so by implication be more fully yourself. Or they may create an 
association in your mind between the product and a famous person, or a 
youthful,   attractive,   or   happy­looking   person.   Even   pictures   of   old   or 
deceased celebrities in their prime work well for that purpose. The unspoken 
assumption   is   that   by   buying   this   product,   through   some   magical   act   of 
appropriation, you become like them, or rather the surface image of them. 
And   so   in   many   cases   you   are   not   buying   a   product   but   an   “identity 
enhancer.” Designer labels are primarily collective identities that you buy 
into. They are expensive and therefore “exclusive.” If everybody could buy 
them, they would lose their psychological value and all you would be left 
with would be their material value, which likely amounts to a fraction of 
what you paid.
What kind of things you identify with will vary from person to person 
according   to   age,   gender,   income,   social   class,   fashion,   the   surrounding 
culture, and so on. What you identify with is all to do with content; whereas, 
the unconscious compulsion to identify is structural. It is one of the most 
basic ways in which the egoic mind operates. 
Paradoxically, what keeps the so­called consumer society going is the 
fact   that   trying   to   find   yourself   through   things   doesn’t   work:   The   ego 
satisfaction is short­lived and so you keep looking for more, keep buying, 
keep consuming. 
Of course, in this physical dimension that our surface selves inhabit, 
things are a necessary and inescapable part of our lives. We need housing, 
clothes, furniture, tools, transportation. There may also be things in our lives 
that we value because of their beauty or inherent quality. We need to honor 
the world of things, not despise it. Each thing has Beingness, is a temporary 
form that has its origin within the formless one Life, the source of all things, 
all   bodies,   all   forms.   In   most   ancient   cultures,   people   believed   that 
everything, even so­called inanimate objects, had an indwelling spirit, and in 
this respect they were closer to the truth than we are today. When you live in 
a world deadened by mental abstraction, you don’t sense the aliveness of the 
universe   anymore.   Most   people   don’t   inhabit   a   living   reality,   but   a 
conceptualized one. 
But we cannot really honor things if we use them as a means to self­
enhancement, that is to say, if we try to find ourselves through them. This is 
exactly what the ego does. Ego­identification with things creates attachment 
to things, obsession with things, which in turn creates our consumer society 
and economic structures where the only measure of progress is always more. 
The unchecked striving for more, for endless growth, is a dysfunction and a 
disease. It is the same dysfunction the cancerous cell manifests, whose only 
goal is to multiply itself, unaware that it is bringing about its own destruction 
by destroying the organism of which it is a part. Some economists are so 
attached to the notion of growth that they can’t let go of that word, so they 
refer to recession as a time of “negative growth.”
A   large   part   of   many   people’s   lives   is   consumed   by   an   obsessive 
preoccupation with things. This is why one of the ills of our times is object 
proliferation. When you can no feel the life that you are, you are likely to fill 
up your life with things. As a spiritual practice, I suggest that you investigate 
your relationship with the world of things through self­observation, and in 
particular, things that are designated with the word “my.” You need to be 
alert and honest to find out, for example, whether your sense of self­worth is 
bound up with things you possess. Do certain things induce a subtle feeling 
of importance or superiority? Does the lack of them make you feel inferior 
to others who have more than you? Do you casually mention things you own 
or show them off to increase your sense of worth in someone else’s eyes and 
through them in your own? Do you feel resentful or angry and somehow 
diminished in your sense of self when someone else has more than you or 
when you lose a prized possession?

THE LOST RING
When I was seeing people as a counselor and spiritual teacher, I would 
visit a woman twice a week whose body was riddled with cancer. She was a 
schoolteacher  in  her mid­forties and had been given no more than a few 
months to live by her doctors. Sometimes a few words were spoken during 
those visits, but mostly we would sit together in silence, and as we did, she 
had  her first glimpses  of  the stillness within herself that she never knew 
existed during her busy life as a schoolteacher. 
One day, however, I arrived to find her in a state of great distress and 
anger. “What happened” I asked. Her diamond ring, of great monetary as 
well as sentimental value, had disappeared, and she said she was sure it had 
been stolen by the woman who came to look after her for a few hours every 
day. She said she didn’t understand how anybody could be so callous and 
heartless as to do this to her. She asked me whether she should confront the 
woman or whether it would be better to call the police immediately. I said I 
couldn’t tell her what to do, but asked her to find out how important a rig or 
anything else was at this point in hr life. “You don’t understand,” she said. 
“This was my grandmother’s ring. I used to wear it every day until I got ill 
and my hands became too swollen. It’s more than just a ring to me. How can 
I not b upset?”
The quickness of her response and the anger and defensiveness in her 
voice were indications that she had not yet become present enough to look 
within and to disentangle her reaction from the event and observe them both. 
Her   anger   and   defensiveness   were   signs   that   the   ego   was   still   speaking 
through her. I said, “I am going to ask you a few questions, but instead of 
answering them now, see if you can find the answers within you. I will pause 
briefly after each question. When an answer comes, it may not necessarily 
come in the form of words.” She said she was ready to listen. I asked: “Do 
you realize that you will have to let go of the ring at some point, perhaps 
quite soon? How much more time do you need before you will be ready to let 
go of it? Will you become less when you let go of it? Has  who you are 
become diminished by the loss?” There were a few minutes of silence after 
the last question.
When she started speaking again, there was a smile on her face, and 
she   seemed   at   peace.   “The   last   question   made   me   realize   something 
important. First I went to my mind for an answer and my mind said, ‘Yes, f 
course you have been diminished.’ Then I asked myself the question again, 
‘Has who I am become diminished?’ This time I tried to feel rather than 
think the answer. And suddenly I could feel my I Am­ness. I have never felt 
that before. If I can feel the I Am so strongly, then who I am hasn’t been 
diminished at all. I can still feel it now, something peaceful but very alive.”
“That is the joy of Being,” I said. “You can only feel it when you get 
out of your head. Being must be felt. It can’t be thought. The ego doesn’t 
know about it because thought is what it consists of. The ring was really in 
your   head   as   a   thought   that   you   confused   with   the   sense   of   I   Am.   You 
thought the I Am or a part of it was in the ring.
“Whatever the ego seeks and gets attached to are substitutes for the 
Being that it cannot feel. You can value and care for things, but whenever 
you get attached to them, you will know it’s the ego. And you are never 
really attached to a thing but to a thought that has ‘I,’ ‘me,’ or ‘mine’ in it. 
Whenever you completely accept a loss, you go beyond ego, and who you 
are, the I Am which is consciousness itself, emerges.”
She said, “Now I understand something Jesus said that never made 
much sense to me before: ‘If someone takes your shirt, let him have your 
coat as well.’”
“That’s right,” I said. “It doesn’t mean you should never lock your 
door. All it means is that sometimes letting things go is an act of far greater 
power than defending or hanging on.”
In   the   last   few   weeks   of  her   life  as  her  body  became  weaker,  she 
became more and more radiant, as if light were shining through her. She 
gave many of her possessions away, some to the woman she thought had 
stolen the ring, and with each thing she gave away, her joy deepened. When 
her   mother   called   me   to   let   me   know   she   had   passed   away,   she   also 
mentioned that after her death they found her ring in the medicine cabinet in 
the bathroom. Did the woman return the ring, or had it been there all the 
time? Nobody will ever know. One thing we do know: Life will give you 
whatever experience is most helpful for the evolution of your consciousness. 
How   do   you   now   this   is   the   experience   you   need?   Because   this   is   the 
experience you are having at this moment.
Is it wrong then to be proud of one’s possessions or to feel resentful 
toward people to have more than you? Not at all. That sense of pride, of 
needing to stand out, the apparent enhancement of one’s self through “more 
than” and diminishment through “less than” is neither right nor wrong – it is 
the ego. The ego isn’t wrong; it’s just unconscious. When you observe the 
ego in yourself, you are beginning to go beyond it. Don’t take the ego too 
seriously. When you detect egoic behavior in yourself, smile. At times you 
may even laugh. How could humanity have been taken in by this for so long? 
Above  all,  know that  the ego isn’t personal. It isn’t  who you are. If you 
consider the ego to be your personal problem, that’s just more ego.
THE ILLUSION OF OWNERSHIP
To “own” something – what does it really mean? What does it mean to make 
something “mine”? If you stand on a street in New York, point to a huge 
skyscraper and say, “That building is mine. I own it,” you are either very 
wealthy or you are delusional or a liar. In any case, you are telling a story in 
which the thought form “I” and the thought form “building” merge into one. 
That’s how the mental concept of ownership works. If everybody agrees with 
your story, there will be signed pieces of paper to certify their agreement 
with it. You are wealthy. If nobody agrees with the story, they will send you 
to a psychiatrist. You are delusional, or a compulsive liar.
It is important to recognize here that the story and the thought forms 
that make up the story, whether people agree with it or not, have absolutely 
nothing to do with who you are. Even if people agree with it, it is ultimately 
a fiction. Many people don’t realize until they are on their deathbed and 
everything external falls away that no thing ever had anything to do with who 
they are. In the proximity of death, the whole concept of ownership stands 
revealed as ultimately meaningless. In the last moments of their life, they 
then also realize that while they were looking throughout their lives for a 
more complete sense of self, what they were really looking for, their Being, 
had actually always already been there, but had been largely obscured by 
their identification with things, which ultimately means identification with 
their mind.
“Blessed   are  the  poor in spirit,” Jesus  said, “for theirs  will  be the 
kingdom of heaven.”1 What does “poor in spirit” mean? No inner baggage, 
no identifications. Not with things, nor with any mental concepts that have a 
sense of self in them. And what is the “kingdom of heaven” The simple but 
profound joy of Being that is there when you let og of identifications and so 
become “poor in spirit.”
This is why renouncing all possessions has been an ancient spiritual 
practice in both East and West. Renunciation of possessions, however, will 
not automatically free you of the ego. It will attempt to ensure its survival by 
finding   something   else   to   identify   with,   for   example,   a   mental   image   of 
yourself as someone who has transcended all interest in material possessions 
and is therefore superior, is more spiritual than others. There are people who 
have renounced all possessions but have a bigger ego than some millionaires. 
If you take away one kind of identification, the ego will quickly find another. 
It ultimately doesn’t mind what it identifies with as long as it has an identity. 
Anti­consumerism or anti­private ownership would be another thought form, 
another   mental   position,   that   can   replace   identification   with   possessions. 
Through it you could make yourself right and others wrong. As we shall see 
later, making yourself right and others wrong is one of the principal egoic 
mind patterns, one of the main forms of unconsciousness. In other words, the 
content of the ego may change; the mind structure that keeps it alive does 
not. 
One of the unconscious assumptions is that by identifying with an 
object   through   the   fiction   of   ownership,   the   apparent   solidity   and 
permanency   of   that   material   object   will   endow   your   sense   of   self   with 
greater solidity and permanency. This applies particularly to buildings and 
even more so to land since it is the only thing you think you can own that 
cannot be destroyed. The absurdity of owning something becomes even more 
apparent in the case of land. In the days of the white settlement, the natives 
of North America found ownership of land an incomprehensible concept. 
And so they lost it when the Europeans made them signs pieces of paper that 
were equally incomprehensible to them. They felt they belonged to the land, 
but the land did not belong to them.
The ego tends to equate having with Being: I have, therefore I am. 
And the more I have, the more I am. The ego lives through comparison. How 
you are seen by others turns into how you see yourself. If everyone lived in a 
mansion or everyone was wealthy, your mansion or your wealth would no 
longer serve to enhance your sense of self. You could then move to a simple 
cabin,   give  up   our  wealth,   and regain an identity by seeing yourself and 
being   seen   as   more   spiritual   than   others.   How   you   are   seen   by   others 
becomes the mirror that tells you what you are like and who you are. The 
ego’s sense of self­worth is in most cases bound up with the worth you have 
in the eyes of others. You need others to give you a sense of self, and if you 
live in a culture that to a large extent equates self­worth with how much and 
what you have, if you cannot look through this collective delusion, you will 
be condemned to chasing after things for the rest of your life in the vain hope 
of finding your worth and completion of your sense of self there. 
How   do   you   let   go   of   attachment   to   things?   Don’t   even   try.   It’s 
impossible. Attachment to things drops away by itself when you no longer 
seek   to   find   yourself   in   them.   In   the   meantime,   just   be   aware   of   your 
attachment to things. Sometimes you may not know that you are attached to 
something, which is to say, until you lose it or there is the threat of loss. If 
you then become upset, anxious, and so on, it means you are attached. If you 
are aware that you are identified with a thing, the identification is no longer 
total. “I am the awareness that is aware that there is attachment.” That’s the 
beginning of the transformation of consciousness. 
WANTING: THE NEED FOR MORE
The   ego   identifies   with   having,   but   its   satisfaction   in   having   is   a 
relatively shallow and short­lived one. Concealed within it remains a deep­
seated sense of dissatisfaction, of incompleteness, of “not enough.” “I don't 
have enough yet,” by which the ego really means, “I am not enough yet.”
As we have seen,  having  – the concept of ownership – is a fiction 
created by the ego to give itself solidity and permanency and make itself 
stand out, make itself special. Since you cannot find yourself through having, 
however, there is another more powerful drive underneath it that pertains to 
the   structure   of   the   ego:   the   need   for   more,   which   we   could   also   call 
“wanting.” No ego can last for long without the need for more. Therefore, 
wanting keeps the ego alive much more than having. The ego wants to want 
more  than  it wants  to  have. And so the shallow satisfaction of having is 
always replaced by more wanting. This is the psychological need for more, 
that is to say, more things to identify with. It is an addictive need, not an 
authentic one. 
In some cases, the psychological need for more or the feeling of not 
enough   that   is   so   characteristic   of   the   ego   becomes   transferred   to   the 
physical level and so turns into insatiable hunger. The sufferers of bulimia 
will often make themselves vomit so they can continue eating. Their mind is 
hungry,   not   their   body.   This  eating  disorder  would  become healed if  the 
sufferers, instead of being identified with their mind, could get in touch with 
their body and so feel the true needs of the body rather than the pseudo­
needs of the egoic mind. 
Some egos know what they want and pursue their aim with grim and 
ruthless   determination   –   Genghis  Khan,  Stalin, Hitler,  to give  just   a few 
larger­than­life examples. The energy behind their wanting, however, creates 
an opposing energy of equal intensity that in the end leads to their downfall. 
in the meantime, they make themselves and many others unhappy, or, in the 
larger­than­life examples, create hell on earth. Most egos have conflicting 
wants. They want different things at different times or may not even know 
what they want except that they don't want what is: the present moment. 
Unease,   restlessness,   boredom,   anxiety,   dissatisfaction   ,   are   the   result   of 
unfulfilled   wanting.   Wanting   is   structural,   so   no   amount   of   content   can 
provide lasting fulfillment as long as that mental structure remains in place. 
Intense wanting that has no specific object can often be found in the still­
developing   ego   of   teenagers,  some of  whom  are in a permanent  state of 
negativity and dissatisfaction. 
The   physical   needs   for   food,   water,   shelter,   clothing,   and   basic 
comforts could be easily met for all humans on the planet, were it not for the 
imbalance of resources created by the insane and rapacious need for more, 
the greed of the ego. It finds collective expression in the economic structures 
of this world, such as the huge corporations, which are egoic entities that 
compete   with   each   other   for   more.   Their   only   blind   aim   is   profit.   They 
pursue that aim with absolute ruthlessness. Nature, animals, people, even 
their own employees, are no more than digits on a balance sheet, lifeless 
objects to be used, then discarded.
The thought forms of “me” and “mine,” of “more than,” of “I want,” 
“I need,” “I must have,” and of “not enough” pertain not to content but to the 
structure of the ego. The content is interchangeable. As long as you don't 
recognize   those   thought   forms   within   yourself,   as   long   as   they   remain 
unconscious, you will believe in what they say; you will be condemned to 
acting   out   those   unconscious   thoughts,   condemned   to   seeking   and   not 
finding – because when those thought forms operate, no possession, place, 
person, or condition will ever satisfy you. No content will satisfy you, as 
long as the egoic structure remains in place. No matter what you have or get, 
you   won't   be   happy.   You   will   always   be  looking  for   something  else   that 
promises greater fulfillment, that promises to make your incomplete sense of 
self complete and fill that sense of lack you feel within. 
IDENTIFICATION WITH THE BODY
Apart from objects, another basic form of identification is with “my” 
body. Firstly, the body is male or female, and so the sense of being a man or 
woman takes up a significant part of most people's sense of self. Gender 
becomes identity. Identification with gender is encouraged at an early age, 
and it forces you into a role, into conditioned patterns of behavior that affect 
all aspects of your life, not just sexuality. It is a role many people become 
completely trapped in, even more so in some of the traditional societies than 
in Western culture where identification with gender is beginning to lessen 
somewhat. In some traditional cultures, the worst fate a woman can have is 
to be unwed or barren, and for a man to lack sexual potency and not be able 
to produce children. Life's fulfillment is perceived to be fulfillment of one's 
gender identity. 
In the West, it is the physical appearance of the body that contributes 
greatly to the sense of who you think you are: its strength or weakness, its 
perceived beauty or ugliness relative to others. For many people, their sense 
of self­worth is intimately bound up with their physical strength, good looks, 
fitness, and external appearance. many feel a diminished sense of self­worth 
because they perceive their body as ugly or imperfect. 
In   some   cases,   the   mental   image   or   concept   of   “my   body”   is   a 
complete   distortion   of   reality.   A   young   woman   may   think   of   herself   as 
overweight and therefore starve herself when in fact she is quite thin. She 
cannot see her body anymore. All she “sees” is the mental concept of her 
body,   which   says   “I   am   fat”   or   “I   will   become   fat.”   At   the   root   of   this 
condition lies identification with the mind. As people have become more and 
more mind­identified, which is the intensification of egoic dysfunction, there 
has   also   been   a   dramatic  increase   in  the  incidence   of  anorexia   in  recent 
decades.   If   the   sufferer   could   look   at   her   body   without   the   interfering 
judgments of her mind or even recognize those judgments for what they are 
instead of believing in them – or better still, if she could feel her body from 
within – this would initiate her healing.
Those who are identified with their good looks, physical strength, or 
abilities   experience   suffering   when   those   attributes   begin   to   fade   and 
disappear, as of course they will. Their very identity that was based on them 
is then threatened with collapse. In either case, ugly or beautiful, people 
derive a significant part of their identity, be it negative or positive, from their 
body. To be more precise, they derive their identity from the I­thought that 
they erroneously attach to the mental image or concept of their body, which 
after all is no more than a physical form that shares the destiny of all forms­ 
impermanence and ultimately decay. 
Equating the physical sense­perceived body that is destined to grow 
old, wither, and die with “I” always leads to suffering sooner or later. To 
refrain   from   identifying   with   the   body   doesn't   mean   that   you   neglect, 
despise, or no longer care for it. If it is strong, beautiful, or vigorous, you can 
enjoy and appreciate those attributes – while they last. You can also improve 
the body's condition through right nutrition and exercise. If you don't' equate 
the body with who you are, when beauty fades, vigor diminishes, or the body 
becomes incapacitated, this will not affect your sense of worth or identity in 
any way. In fact, as the body begins to weaken, the formless dimension, the 
light of consciousness, can shine more easily through the fading form.
It is not just people with good or near­perfect bodies who are likely to 
equate   it   with   who   they   are.   You   can   just   as   easily   identify   with   a 
“problematic” body and make the body's imperfection, illness, or disability 
in to your identity. You may then think and speak of yourself as a “sufferer” 
of   this   or   that   chronic   illness   or   disability.   You   receive   a   great   deal   of 
attention   from   doctors   and   others   who   constantly   confirm   to   you   your 
conceptual identity as a sufferer or a patient. You then unconsciously cling to 
the   illness   because   it   has   become   the   most   important   part   of   who   you 
perceive yourself to be. It has become another thought form with which the 
ego can identify. Once the ego has found an identity, it does not want to let 
go. Amazingly but not infrequently, the ego in search of a stronger identity 
and can and does create illnesses in order to strengthen itself through them. 
FEELING THE INNER BODY
Although body­identification is one of the most basic forms of ego, 
the good news is that it is also the one that you can most easily go beyond. 
This is done not by trying to convince yourself that you are not your body, 
but by shifting your attention from the external form of your body and from 
thoughts about your body – beautiful, ugly, strong, weak, too fat, too thin – 
to the feeling of aliveness inside it. No matter what your body's appearance 
is on the outer level, beyond the outer form it is an intensely alive energy 
field.
If you are not familiar with “inner body” awareness, close your eyes 
for a moment and find out if there is life inside your hands. Don't ask your 
mind. It will say, “ I can't feel anything.” Probably it will also say, “Give me 
something more interesting to think about.” So instead of asking your mind, 
go to the hands directly. By this I mean become aware of the subtle feeling 
of aliveness inside them. It is there. You just have to go there with your 
attention to notice it. you may get a slight tingling sensation at first, then a 
feeling of energy or aliveness. If you hold your attention in your hands for a 
while, the sense of aliveness will intensify. Some people won't even have to 
close their eyes. They will be able to feel their “inner hands” at the same 
times as they read this. Then go to your feet, keep your attention there for a 
minute or so, and begin to feel your hands and feet at the same time. Then 
incorporate other parts of the body – legs, arms, abdomen, chest, and so on – 
into that feeling until you are aware of the inner body as a global sense of 
aliveness.
What I call the “inner body” isn't really the body anymore but life 
energy, the bridge between form and formlessness. Make it a habit to feel the 
inner body as often as you can. After a while, you won't need to close your 
eyes  anymore to feel it. For example, see if you can feel the inner body 
whenever you listen to someone. It almost seems like a paradox: When you 
are   in   touch   with   the   inner   body,  you  are   not   identified  with  your   body 
anymore, nor are you identified with your mind. This is to say, you are no 
longer   identified   with   form   but   moving   away   from   form­identification 
toward   formlessness,   which   we   may   also   call   Being.   It   is   your   essence 
identity. Body awareness not only anchors you in the present moment, it is a 
doorway out of the prison that is the ego. It also strengthens the immune 
system and the body's ability to heal itself. 
FORGETFULNESS OF BEING
Ego is always identification with form, seeking yourself and thereby 
losing   yourself   in   some   form.   Forms   are   not   just   material   objects   and 
physical   bodies.   More   fundamental   than   the   external   forms   –   things   and 
bodies   –   are   the   thought   forms   that   continuously   arise   in   the   field   of 
consciousness.   They   are   energy   formations,   finer   and   less   dense   than 
physical matter, but they are forms nonetheless. What you may be aware of 
as a voice in your head the at never stops speaking is the stream of incessant 
and   compulsive   thinking.   When   every   thought   absorbs   your   attention 
completely, when you are so identified with the voice in your head and the 
motions that accompany it that you lose yourself in every thought and every 
emotion, then you are totally identified with form and therefore in the grip of 
ego.. Ego is a conglomeration of recurring thought forms and conditioned 
mental­emotional patterns that are invested with a sense of I, a sense of self. 
Ego  arises when  your  sense of Beingness,  of  “I Am,” which is formless 
consciousness,   gets   mixed   up   with   form.   This   is   the   meaning   of 
identification. This is forgetfulness of Being, the primary error, the illusion 
of absolute separateness that turns reality into a nightmare.

FROM DESCARTES'S ERROR TO SARTRE'S INSIGHT
The   seventeenth­century   philosopher   Descartes,   regarded   as   the 
founder of modern philosophy, gave expression to this primary error with his 
famous dictum (which he saw as primary truth): “I think, therefore I am.” 
This was the answer he found to the question “Is there anything I can know 
with   absolute   certainty?”   He   realized   that   the   fact   that   he   was   always 
thinking was beyond doubt, and so he equated thinking with Being, that is to 
say, identity – I am – with thinking. Instead of the ultimate truth, he had 
found the root of the ego, but he didn't know that.
It took almost three hundred years before another famous philosopher 
saw something in that statement that Descartes, as well as everybody else, 
had overlooked. His name was Jean­Paul Sartre. He looked at Descartes's 
statement “I think, therefore I am” very deeply and suddenly realized, in his 
own words, “The consciousness that says 'I am' is not the consciousness that 
thinks.”   What   did   he   mean   by   that?   When   you   are   aware   that   you   are 
thinking, that awareness is not part of thinking. It is a different dimension of 
consciousness.   And   it   is   that   awareness   that   says   “I   am.”   If   there   were 
nothing but thought in you, you wouldn't even know you are thinking. You 
would be like a dreamer who doesn't know he is dreaming. You would be as 
identified   with   every   thought   as   the   dreamer   is   with   every   image   in   the 
dream.   Many   people   still   live  like  that,  like   sleepwalkers,  trapped  in  old 
dysfunctional   mind­sets   that   continuously   re­create   the   same   nightmarish 
reality. When you know you are dreaming, you are awake within the dream. 
Another dimension of consciousness has come in.
The implication of Sartre's insight is profound, but he himself was still 
too identified with thinking to realize the full significance of what he had 
discovered: an emerging new dimension of consciousness.
THE PEACE THAT PASSES ALL UNDERSTANDING
There are many accounts of people who experienced that emerging 
new dimension of consciousness as a result of tragic loss at some point in 
their lives. Some lost all of their possessions, others their children or spouse, 
their social position, reputation, or physical abilities. In some cases, through 
disaster or war, they lost all of these simultaneously and found themselves 
with   “nothing.”   We   may   call   this   a   limit­situation.   Whatever   they   had 
identified with, whatever gave them their sense of self, had been taken away. 
Then suddenly and inexplicably, the anguish or intense fear they initially felt 
gave   way   to   a   scared   sense   of   Presence,   a   deep   peace   and   serenity   and 
complete freedom from fear. This phenomenon must have been familiar to 
St.   Paul,   who   used   the   expression   “the   peace   of   God   which   passeth   all 
understanding.”2  It is indeed a peace that doesn't seem to make sense, and 
the people who experienced it asked themselves: In the face of this, how can 
it be that I feel such peace?
The answer is simple, once you realize what the ego is and how it 
works. When forms that you had identified with, that gave you your sense of 
self, collapse or are taken away, it can lead to a collapse of the ego, since ego 
is identification with form. When there is nothing to identify with anymore, 
who are you? When forms around you die or death approaches, your sense of 
Beingness,   of   I   Am,   is   freed   from   its   entanglement   with   form:   Spirit   is 
released from its imprisonment in matter. You realize your essential identity 
as formless, as an all­pervasive Presence, of Being prior to all forms, all 
identifications. You realize your true identity as consciousness itself, rather 
than what consciousness had identified with. That's the peace of God. The 
ultimate truth of who you are is not in I am this or I am that, but I Am.
Not   everybody   who   experiences   great   loss   also   experiences   this 
awakening,   this   disidentification   from   form.   Some   immediately   create   a 
strong   mental   image   or   thought   form   in  which  they  see  themselves   as   a 
victim, whether it be of circumstances, other people, an unjust fate, or God. 
This thought form and the emotions it creates, such as anger, resentment, 
self­pity, and so on, they strongly identify with, and it immediately takes the 
place of all the other identifications that have collapsed through the loss. In 
other words, the ego quickly finds a new form. The fact that this new form is 
a deeply unhappy one doesn't concern the ego too much, as long as it has an 
identity, good or bad. In fact, this new ego will be more contracted, more 
rigid and impenetrable than the old one. 
Whenever   tragic   loss   occurs,   you   either   resist   or   you   yield.   Some 
people   become   bitter   or   deeply   resentful;   others   become   compassionate, 
wise, and loving. Yielding means inner acceptance of what is. You are open 
to life. Resistance is an inner contraction, a hardening of the shell of the ego. 
You   are   closed.   Whatever   action   you   take   in   a   state   of   inner   resistance 
(which we could also call negativity) will create more outer resistance, and 
the universe will not be on your side; life will not be helpful. If the shutters 
are closed, the sunlight cannot come in. When you yield internally, when you 
surrender, a new dimension of consciousness opens up. If action is possible 
or necessary, your action will be in alignment with the whole and supported 
by creative intelligence, the unconditioned consciousness which in a state of 
inner   openness   you   become   one   with.   Circumstances   and   people   then 
become helpful, cooperative. Coincidences happen. If no action is possible, 
you rest in the peace and inner stillness that come with surrender. You rest in 
God. 
CHAPTER THREE
THE CORE OF EGO
Most people are so completely identified with the voice in the head – the 
incessant stream of involuntary and compulsive thinking and the  emotions 
that accompany it – that we may describe them as being possessed by their 
mind. As long as you are completely unaware of this you take the thinker to 
be who you are. This is the egoic mind. We call it egoic because there is a 
sense   of   self,   of   I   (ego),   in   every   thought   –   every   memory,   every 
interpretation,   opinion,   viewpoint,   reaction,   emotion.   This   is 
unconsciousness,   spiritually   speaking.   Your   thinking,   the   content   of   your 
mind, is of course  conditioned by the past: your upbringing, culture, family 
background, and so on. The central core of all your mind activity consists of 
certain   repetitive   and   persistent   thoughts,   emotions,   and   reactive   patterns 
that you identify with most strongly. This entity is the ego itself.
In most cases, when you say “I,” it is the ego speaking, not you, as we 
have seen. It consists of thought and emotion, of a bundle of memories you 
identify   with   as   “me   and   my   story,”   of   habitual   roles   you   play   without 
knowing it, of collective identifications such as nationality, religion, race, 
social class, or political allegiance. It also contains personal identifications, 
not only with possessions, but also with opinions, external appearance, long­
standing resentments, or concepts of yourself as better than or not as good as 
others, as a success or failure.
The content of the ego varies from person to person, bu in every ego 
the same structure operates. In other words: Egos only differ on the surface. 
Deep down they are all the same. In what way are they the same? They live 
on identification and separation. When you live through the mind­made self 
comprised of thought and emotion that is the ego, the basis for your identity 
is   precarious   because   thought   and   emotion   are   by   their   very   nature 
ephemeral,  fleeting.  So every ego is continuously struggling for survival, 
trying to protect and enlarge itself. To uphold the I­thought, it needs the 
opposite thought of “the other.” The conceptual “I” cannot survive without 
the conceptual “other.” The others are most other when I see them as my 
enemies. At one end of this scale of this unconscious egoic pattern lies the 
egoic compulsive habit of faultfinding and complaining about others. Jesus 
referred to it when he said, “Why to do you see the speck that is in your 
brother's eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye?”1 At the other 
end of the scale, there is physical violence between individuals and warfare 
between nations. In the Bible, Jesus' question remains unanswered, but the 
answer is, of course: Because when I criticize or condemn another, it makes 
me feel bigger, superior.

COMPLAINING AND RESENTMENT
Complaining is one of the ego's favorite strategies for strengthening itself. 
Every  complaint  is  a little  story the mind makes up that you completely 
believe   in.   Whether   you   complain   aloud   or   only   in   thought   makes   no 
difference. Some egos that perhaps don't have much else to identify with 
easily survive on complaining alone. When you are in the grip of such and 
ego, complaining, especially about other people, is habitual and, of course, 
unconscious, which means you don't know what you are doing. Applying 
negative   mental   labels   to   people,  either   to  their   face   or   more  commonly 
when you speak about them to others or even just think about them, is often 
part of this pattern. Name­calling is the crudest form of such labeling and of 
the ego's need to be right and triumph over others: “jerk, bastard, bitch” ­ all 
definitive pronouncements that you can't argue with. On the next level down 
on the scale of unconsciousness, you have shouting and screaming, and not 
much below that, physical violence. 
Resentment is the emotion that goes with complaining and the mental 
labeling of people and adds even more energy to the ego. Resentment means 
to feel bitter, indignant, aggrieved, or offended. You resent other people's 
greed, their dishonesty, their lack of integrity, what they are doing what they 
did in the past, what they said what they failed to do, what they should for 
shouldn't   have   done.   The   ego   loves   it.   Instead   of   overlooking 
unconsciousness in others, you make it in to their identity. Who is doing 
that? The unconsciousness in you, the ego. Sometimes the “fault” that you 
perceive   in   another   isn't   even   there.   It   is   a   total   misinterpretation,   a 
projection by a mind conditioned to see enemies and to make itself right or 
superior.   At   other   times,   the   fault   may   be   theirs,   but   by   focusing   on   it, 
sometimes to the exclusion of everything else, you amplify it. And what you 
react to in another, you strengthen in yourself. 
Non­reaction to the ego in others is one of the most effective ways not 
only of going beyond ego in yourself but also of dissolving the collective 
human   ego.   But   you   can   only   be   in   a   state   of   nonreaction   if   you   can 
recognize   someone's   behavior   as   coming   from   the   ego,   as   being   an 
expression of the collective human dysfunction. When you realize it's not 
personal,   there   is   no   longer   a   compulsion   to   react   as   if   it   were.   By   not 
reacting to the ego, you will often be able to bring out the sanity in others, 
which is the unconditioned consciousness as opposed to the conditioned. At 
times you may have to take practical steps to protect yourself from deeply 
unconscious people. This you can do without making them into enemies. 
Your greatest protection, however, is being conscious. Somebody becomes 
an   enemy   if   you   personalize   the   unconsciousness   that   is   the   ego.   Non 
reaction   is   not   weakness   but   strength.   Another   word   for   nonreaction   is 
forgiveness. To forgive is to overlook, or rather to look through. You look 
through the ego to the sanity that is in every human being as his or her 
essence. 
The   ego   loves   to   complain   and   feel   resentful   not   only   abut   other 
people but also about situations. What you can do to a person, you can also 
do to a situation: make it into an enemy. The implication is always: This 
should not be happening; I don't want to be here; I don't want to be doing 
this; I'm being treated unfairly. And the egos greatest enemy of all is, of 
course, the present moment, which is to say, life itself.
Complaining   is   not   to   be   confused   with   informing   someone   of   a 
mistake   or   deficiency   so   that   it   can   be   put   right.   And   to   refrain   from 
complaining   doesn't   necessarily   mean   putting   up   with   bad   quality   or 
behavior. There is no ego in telling the waiter that your soup is cold and 
needs to be heated up – if you stick to the facts, which are always neutral. 
“How dare you serve me cold soup...” That's complaining. There is a “me” 
here that loves to feel personally offended by the cold soup and is going to 
make   the   most   of   it,   a   “me”   that   enjoys   making   someone   wrong.   The 
complaining we are talking about is in the service of the ego, not of change. 
Sometimes it becomes obvious that the ego doesn't really want change so 
that it can go on complaining. 
See   if   you   can   catch,  that   is  to  say,  notice,  the   voice   in  the  head, 
perhaps in the very moment it complains about something, and recognize it 
for what it is: the voice of the ego, no more than a conditioned mind­pattern, 
a thought. Whenever you notice that voice, you will also realize that you are 
not the voice, but the one who is aware of it. In fact, you are the awareness 
that is aware of the voice. In the background, there is the awareness. In the 
foreground, there is the voice, the thinker. In this way you are becoming free 
of the ego, free of the unobserved mind. The moment you become aware of 
the ego in you, it is strictly speaking no longer the ego, but just an old, 
conditioned   mind­pattern.   Ego   implies   unawareness.   Awareness   and   ego 
cannot coexist. The old mind­pattern or mental habit may still survive and 
reoccur for a while because it has the momentum of thousands of years of 
collective human unconsciousness behind it, but every time it is recognized, 
it is weakened. 
REACTIVITY AND GRIEVANCES
Whereas resentment is often the emotion that goes with complaining, it may 
also be accompanied by a stronger emotion such as anger or some other form 
of   upset.   In   this   way,   it   becomes   more   highly   charged   energetically. 
Complaining   then   turns   into   reactivity,   another   of   the   ego's   ways   of 
strengthening itself. There are many people who are always waiting for the 
next thing to react against, to feel annoyed or disturbed about – and it never 
takes long before they find it. “This is an outrage,” they say. “How dare 
you...” “ I resent this.” They are addicted to upset and anger as others are to a 
drug. Through reacting against this or that they assert and strengthen their 
feeling of self. 
A long­standing resentment is called a grievance. To carry a grievance 
is   to   be   in   a   permanent   state   of   “against,”   and   that   is   why   grievances 
constitute a significant part of many people's ego. Collective grievances can 
survive for centuries in the psyche of a nation or tribe and fuel a never­
ending cycle of violence.
A grievance is a strong negative emotion connected to an event in the 
sometimes distant past that is being kept alive by compulsive thinking, by 
retelling the story in the head or out loud of “what someone did to me” or “ 
what someone did to us.” A grievance will also contaminate other areas of 
your life. For example, while you think about and feel your grievance, its 
negative emotional energy can distort your perception of an event that is 
happening in the present or influence the way in which you speak or behave 
to   ward   someone   in   the   present.   One   strong   grievance   is   enough   to 
contaminate large areas of your life and keep you in the grip of the ego.
It requires honesty to see whether you still harbor grievances, whether 
there is someone in your life you have not completely forgiven, an “enemy.” 
If you do, become aware of the grievance both on the level of thought as well 
as emotion, that is to say, be ware of the thoughts that keep it alive, and feel 
the emotion that is the body's response to those thoughts. Don't try to let go 
of the grievance.  Trying  to let go, to forgive, does not work. Forgiveness 
happens   naturally   when   you   see   that   it   has   no   purpose   other   than   to 
strengthen   a  false   sense   of   self,  to   keep  the   ego   in  place.  The   seeing  is 
freeing. Jesus' teaching to “Forgive your enemies” is essentially about the 
undoing of one of the main egoic structures in the human mind.
The past has no power to stop you from being present now. Only your 
grievance about the past can do that. And what is a grievance? The baggage 
of old thought and emotion.

BEING RIGHT, MAKING WRONG
Complaining as well as faultfinding and reactivity strengthen the ego's 
sense of boundary and separateness on which tis survival depends. But they 
also strengthen the ego in another way by giving it a feeling of superiority on 
which it thrives. It may not be immediately apparent how complaining, say, 
about   a   traffic   jam,   about   politicians,   about   the  “greedy   wealthy”   or   the 
“lazy unemployed,” or your colleagues or ex­spouse , men or women, can 
give   you   a   sense   of   superiority.   Here   is   why.   When   you   complain,   by 
implication you are right and the person or situation you complain about or 
react against is wrong.
There is nothing that strengthens the ego more than being right. Being 
right is identification with a mental position – a perspective, an opinion, a 
judgment, a story. For you to be right, of course, you need someone else to 
be wrong, and so the ego loves to make wrong in order to be right. In other 
words: you need to make others wrong in order to get a stronger sense of 
who you are. Not only a person, but also a situation can be made wrong 
through complaining and reactivity, which always implies that “this should 
not be happening.” Being right places you in a position of imagined moral 
superiority in relation to the person or situation that is being judged and 
found wanting. It is that sense of superiority the ego craves and through 
which it enhances itself.
IN DEFENCE OF AN ILLUSION
Facts undoubtedly exist. If you say: “Light travels faster than sound,” 
and someone else says the opposite is the case, you are obviously right, and 
he is wrong. The simple observation that lightning precedes thunder could 
confirm this. So not only are you right, but you know you are right. Is there 
any ego involved in this? Possibly, but not necessarily. If you are simply 
stating what you know to be true, the ego is not involved at all, because there 
is   no   identification.   Identification   with   what?   With   mind   and   a   mental 
position.   Such   identification,   however,   can   easily   creep   in.   If   you   find 
yourself saying, “Believe me, I know” or “Why do you never believe me?” 
then the ego has already crept in. It is hiding in the little word “me.” A 
simple   statement:   “Light   is   faster   than   sound,”   although   true,   is   now   in 
service of illusion, of ego. It has become contaminated with a false sense of 
“I”; it has become personalized, turned into a mental position. The “I” feels 
diminished or offended because somebody doesn't believe what “I” said.
Ego   takes   everything   personally.   Emotion   arises,   defensiveness, 
perhaps even aggression. Are you defending the truth? No, the truth, in any 
case, needs no defense. The light or sound does not care about what you or 
anybody else thinks. You are defending yourself, or rather the illusion of 
yourself, the mind­made substitute. It would be even more accurate to say 
that the illusion is defending itself. If even the simple and straightforward 
realm of facts can lend itself to egoic distortion and illusion, how much more 
so  the less  tangible  realm  of opinions, viewpoints, and judgments, all  of 
them thought forms that can easily become infused with a sense of “I.”
Every ego confuses opinions and viewpoints with facts. Furthermore, 
it cannot tell the differences between an event and its reaction to that event. 
Every ego is a master of selective perception and distorted interpretation. 
Only   through   awareness   –   not   through   thinking   –   can   you   differentiate 
between fact and opinion. Only through awareness are you able to see: There 
is the situation and here is the anger I feel about it, and then realize there are 
other ways of approaching the situation, other ways of seeing it and dealing 
with it. Only through awareness can you see th totality of the situation or 
person instead of adopting one limited perspective.
TRUTH: RELATIVE OR ABSOLUTE?
Beyond the realm of simple and verifiable facts, the certainty that “I 
am right and you are wrong” is a dangerous thing in personal relationships as 
well as in interactions between nations, tribes, religions, and so on.
But if the belief “I am right; you are wrong” is one of the ways in 
which the ego strengthens itself, if making yourself right and others wrong is 
a   mental   dysfunction   that   perpetuates   separation   and   conflict   between 
human   beings,   does   that   mean   there   is   no   such   thing   as   right   or   wrong 
behavior, action, or belief? And wouldn't that be the moral relativism that 
some contemporary Christian teachings see as the great evil of our times?
The history of Christianity is, of course, a prime example of how the 
belief that you are in sole possession of the truth, that is to say, right , can 
corrupt  your actions  and  behavior to the point  of insanity. For centuries, 
torturing   and   burning   people   alive   if   their   opinion   diverged   even   in   the 
slightest   from  Church   doctrine or narrow interpretations of scripture (the 
“Truth”) was considered right because the victims were “wrong.” They were 
so   wrong   that   they   needed   to  be killed.  The  Truth  was  considered more 
important than human life. And what was the Truth? A story you had to 
believe in; which means, a bundle of thoughts.
The one million people that mad dictator Pol Pot of Cambodia ordered 
killed   included   everybody   who   wore   glasses.   Why?   To   him,   the   Marxist 
interpretation of history was the absolute truth, and according to his version 
of it, those who wore glasses belonged to the educated glass, the bourgeoisie, 
the exploiters of the peasants. They needed to be eliminated to make room 
for a new social order. His truth also was a bundle of thoughts.
The   Catholic   and   other   churches   are   actually   correct   when   they 
identify relativism, the belief that there is no absolute truth to guide human 
behavior, as one of the evils of our times; but you won't find absolute truth if 
you look for it where it cannot be found: in doctrines, ideologies, sets of 
rules, or stories. What do all of these have in common? They are made up of 
thought. Thought can at best point to the truth, but it never is the truth. That's 
why Buddhists say “The finger pointing to the moon is not the moon.” All 
religions are equally false and equally true, depending on how you use them. 
You can use them in the service of the ego, or you can use them in the 
service of the Truth. If you believe only your religion is the Truth, you are 
using  it  in  the  service of  the ego. used in such a way, religion becomes 
ideology and creates an illusory sense of superiority as well as division and 
conflict   between   people.   In   the   service   of   the   Truth,   religious   teachings 
represent signposts or maps left behind by awakened humans to assist you in 
spiritual awakening, that is to say, in becoming free of identification with 
form.
There is only one absolute Truth, and all other truths emanate from it. 
When you find that Truth, your actions will be in alignment with it. Human 
action can reflect the Truth, or it can reflect illusion. Can the Truth be put 
into words? Yes, but the words are, of course, not it. They only point to it.
The Truth is inseparable from who you are. Yes, you are the truth. If 
you look for it elsewhere, you will be deceived every time. The very Being 
that you are is Truth. Jesus tried to convey that when he said, “I am the way 
and the truth and the life.”2 These words uttered by Jesus are one of the most 
powerful   and   direct   pointers   to   the   Truth,   if   understood   correctly.   If 
misinterpreted, however, they become a great obstacle. Jesus speaks of the 
innermost I Am, the essence identity of every man and woman, every life­
form, in fact. He speaks of the life that you are. Some Christian mystics have 
called it the Christ within; Buddhists call it your Buddha nature; for Hindus, 
it is Atman, the indwelling God. When you are in touch with that dimension 
within yourself – and being in touch with it is your natural state, not some 
miraculous achievement – all your actions and relationships will reflect the 
oneness   with   all   life   that   you   sense   deep   within.   This   is   love.   Laws, 
commandments, rules, and regulations are necessary for those who are cut 
off from who they are, the Truth within. They prevent the worst excesses of 
the ego, and often they don't even do that. “Love and do what you will,” said 
St. Augustine. Words cannot get much closer to the Truth than that.
THE EGO IS NOT PERSONAL
On a collective level, the mind­set “We are right and they are wrong” 
is particularly deeply entrenched in those parts of the world where conflict 
between two nations, races, tribes, religions, or ideologies is long­standing, 
extreme, and endemic. Both sides of the conflict are equally identified with 
their   own   perspective,   their   own   “story,”   that   is   to   say,   identified   with 
thought.   Both   are   equally   incapable   of   seeing   that   another   perspective, 
another story, may exist and also be valid. Israeli writer Y. Halevi speaks of 
the   possibility   of   “accommodating   a   competing   narrative,”3  but   in   many 
parts of the world, people are not yet able or willing to do that. Both sides 
believe themselves to be in possession of the truth. Both regard themselves 
as victims and the “other” as evil, and because they have conceptualized and 
thereby dehumanized the other as the enemy, they can kill and inflict all 
kinds   of   violence   on   the   other,   even   on   children,   without   feeling   their 
humanity   and   suffering.   They   become   trapped   in   an   insane   spiral   of 
perpetration and retribution, action and reaction. 
Here it becomes obvious that the human ego in its collective aspect as 
“us” against “them” is even more insane that n the “me,” the individual ego, 
although the mechanism is the same. By far the greater part of violence that 
humans   have  inflicted   on   each other is  not  the work of criminals or  the 
mentally derange, but of normal, respectable citizens in the service of the 
collective ego. One can go far as to say that on this planet “normal” equals 
insane.   What   is   it   that   lies   at   the   root   of   this   insanity?   Complete 
identification with thought and emotion, that is to say, ego.
Greed,   selfishness,   exploitation,   cruelty,   and   violence   are   still   all­
pervasive on this planet. When you don't recognize them as individual and 
collective manifestations of an underlying dysfunction or mental illness, you 
fall into the error of personalizing them. You construct a conceptual identity 
for an individual or group, and you say: “This is who he is. This is who they 
are.”   When   you   confuse   the   ego   that   you   perceive   in   others   with   their 
identity,   it   is   the   work   of   your   own   ego   that   uses   this   misperception   to 
strengthen   itself   through   being   right   and   therefore   superior,   and   through 
reacting   with   condemnation,   indignation,   and   often   anger   against   the 
perceived enemy. All this is enormously satisfying to the ego. It strengthens 
the sense of separation between yourself and the other, whose “otherness” 
has become magnified to such an extent that you can no longer feel your 
common humanity, nor the rootedness in the one Life that you share with 
each human being, your common divinity. 
The particular egoic patterns that you react to most strongly in others 
and misperceive as their identity tend to be the same patterns that are also in 
you, but that you are unable or unwilling to detect within yourself. In that 
sense, you have much to learn from your enemies. What is it in them that 
you find most upsetting, most disturbing? Their selfishness? Their greed? 
Their need for power and control? Their insincerity, dishonesty, propensity to 
violence, or whatever it may be? Anything that you resent and strongly react 
to in another is also in you. But it is no more than a form of ego, and as such, 
it is completely impersonal. It has nothing to do with who that person is, nor 
has it anything to do with who you are. Only if you mistake it for who you 
are can observing it within you be threatening to your sense of self.
WAR IS A MIND­SET
In certain cases, you may need to protect yourself or someone else 
from  being  harmed  by  another, but  beware of making it  your mission to 
“eradicate evil,” as you are likely to turn into the very thing you are fighting 
against.   Fighting   unconsciousness   will   draw   you   into   unconsciousness 
yourself.   Unconsciousness,   dysfunctional   egoic   behavior,   can   never   be 
defeated   by   attacking   it.   Even   if   you   defeat   your   opponent,   the 
unconsciousness will simply have moved into you, or the opponent reappears 
in a new disguise. Whatever you fight, you strengthen, and what you resist, 
persists.
These days you frequently hear the expression “the war against” this 
or that, and whenever I hear it, I know that it is condemned to failure. There 
is the war against drugs, the war against crime, the war against terrorism, the 
war against cancer, the war against poverty, and so on. For example, despite 
the war against crime and drugs, there has been a dramatic increase in crime 
and   drug­related   offenses   in   the   past   twenty­five   years.   The   prison 
population of the United States has gone up from just under 300,000 in 1980 
to a staggering 2.1 million in 2004.4  The war against disease has given us, 
amongst other things, antibiotics. At first, they were spectacularly successful, 
seemingly enabling us to win the war against infectious diseases. Now many 
experts agree that the widespread and indiscriminate use of antibiotics has 
created a time bomb and that antibiotic­resistant strains of bacteria, so­called 
super bugs, will in all likelihood bring about a reemergence of those diseases 
and possibly epidemics. According to the Journal of the American Medical 
Association, medical treatment is the third­leading cause of death after heart 
disease and cancer in the United States. Homeopathy and Chinese medicine 
are two examples of possible alternative approaches to disease that do not 
treat the illness as an enemy and therefore do not create new diseases.
War is a mind­set, and all action that comes out of such a mind­set 
will either strengthen the enemy, the perceived evil, or, if the war is won, 
will create a new enemy,  a new evil equal to and often worse than the one 
that was  defeated.  There  is  a deep interrelatedness between your state of 
consciousness and external reality. When you are in the grip of a mind­set 
such   as   “war,”   your   perceptions   become   extremely   selective   as   well   as 
distorted. In other words, you will see only what you want to see and then 
misinterpret it. You can imagine what kind of action comes out of such a 
delusional system. Or instead of imagining it, watch the news on TV tonight.
Recognize the ego for what it is: a collective dysfunction, the insanity 
of the human mind. When you recognize it for what it is, you no longer 
misperceive it as somebody's identity. Once you see the ego for what it is, it 
becomes   much   easier   to   remain   nonreactive   toward   it.   you   don't   take   it 
personally anymore. there is no complaining, blaming, accusing, or making 
wrong. Nobody is wrong. It is the ego in someone, that's all. Compassion 
arises when you recognize that all are suffering from the same sickness of 
the   mind,   some   more   acutely   than   others.   You   do   not   fuel   the   drama 
anymore that is part of all egoic relationships. What is its fuel? Reactivity. 
The ego thrives on it.
DO YOU WANT PEACE OR DRAMA?
You want peace. There is no one who does not want peace. Yet there is 
something else in you that wants the drama, wants the conflict. You may not 
be able to feel it at this moment. You may have to wait for a situation or even 
just a thought that triggers a reaction in you: someone accusing you of this or 
that, not acknowledging you, encroaching on your territory, questioning the 
way   you   do   things,   an   argument   about   money....   Can   you   then   feel   the 
enormous surge of force moving through you, the fear, perhaps being masked 
by anger or hostility? Can you hear your own voice becoming harsh or shrill, 
or louder and a few octaves lower? Can you be aware of your mind racing to 
defend its position, justify, attack, blame? In other words, can you awaken at 
that moment of unconsciousness? Can you feel that there is something in 
you that is at war, something that feels threatened and wants to survive at all 
cost, that needs the drama in order to assert its identity as the victorious 
character within that theatrical production? Can you feel there is something 
in you that would rather be right than at peace?
BEYOND EGO: YOUR TRUE IDENTITY
When the ego is at war, know that it is no more than an illusion that is 
fighting to survive. That illusion thinks it is you. It is not easy at first to be 
there as the witnessing Presence, especially when the ego is in survival mode 
or some emotional pattern from the past has become activated, but once you 
have had a taste of it, you will grow in Presence power, and the ego will lose 
its grip on you. And so a power comes into your life that is far greater than 
the ego, greater than the mind. All that is required to become free of the ego 
is to be aware of it, since awareness and ego are incompatible. Awareness is 
the power that is concealed within the present moment. This is why we may 
also call it Presence. The ultimate purpose of human existence, which is to 
say, your purpose is to bring that power into this world. And this is also why 
becoming free of the ego cannot be made into a goal to be attained at some 
point in the future. Only Presence can free you of the ego, and you can only 
be present Now, not yesterday or tomorrow. only Presence can undo the past 
in you and thus transform your state of consciousness. 
What is spiritual realization? The belief that you are spirit? No, that's 
a thought. A little closer to the truth than the thought that believes you are 
who   your   birth   certificate   says   you   are,   but   still   a   thought.   Spiritual 
realization is to see clearly that what I perceive, experience, think, or feel is 
ultimately not who I am, that I cannot find myself in all those things that 
continuously pass away. The Buddha was probably the first human being to 
see this clearly, and so anata (no self) became one of the central points of his 
teaching. And when Jesus said, “Deny thyself,” what he meant was : Negate 
(and thus undo) the illusion of self. If the self – ego – were truly who I am, it 
would be absurd to “deny” it.
What   remains   is   the   light   of   consciousness   in   which   perceptions, 
experiences, thoughts, and feelings come and go. That is Being, that is the 
deeper, true I. When I know myself as that, whatever happens in my life is no 
longer of absolute but only of relative importance. I honor it, but it loses its 
absolute seriousness, its heaviness. The only thing that ultimately matters is 
this: Can I sense my essential Beingness, the I Am, in the background of my 
life at all times? To be more accurate, can I sense the I Am that I Am at this 
moment? Can I sense my essential identity as consciousness itself? Or am I 
losing myself in what happens, losing myself in the mind, in the world?
ALL STRUCTURES ARE UNSTABLE
Whatever   form   it   takes,   the   unconscious   drive   behind   ego   is   to 
strengthen the image of who I think I am, the phantom self that came into 
existence when thought – a great blessing as well as a great curse – began to 
take over and obscured the simple yet profound joy of connectedness with 
Being, the Source, God. Whatever behavior the ego manifests, the hidden 
motivating force is always the same: the need to stand out, be special, be in 
control; the need for power, for attention, for more. And, of course, the need 
to feel a sense of separation, that is to say, the need for opposition, enemies. 
The   ego   always   wants   something   from   other   people   or   situations. 
There is always a hidden agenda, always a sense of “not enough yet,” of 
insufficiency and lack that needs to be filled. It uses people and situations to 
get what it wants, and even when it succeeds, it is never satisfied for long. 
Often it is thwarted in its aims, and for the most part the gap between “I 
want” and “what is” becomes a constant source of upset and anguish. the 
famous and now classic pop song, “(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction, “ is the 
song of the ego. The underlying emotion that governs all the activity of the 
ego is fear. The fear of being nobody, the fear of nonexistence, the fear of 
death. All its activities are ultimately designed to eliminate this fear, but the 
most   the   ego   can   ever   do   is  to  cover  it  up  temporarily  with  an  intimate 
relationship, a new possession, or winning at this or that. Illusion will never 
satisfy you. Only the truth of who you are, if realized, will set you free.
Why fear? Because the ego arises by identification with form, and 
deep down it knows that no forms are permanent, that they are all fleeting. 
So there is always a sense of insecurity around the ego even if on the outside 
it appears confident.
As I was walking with a friend through a beautiful nature reserve near 
Malibu   in   California,   we   came   upon  the  ruins   of  what   had  been  once  a 
country house, destroyed by a fire several decades ago. As we approached 
the property, long overgrown with trees and all kinds of magnificent plants, 
there was a sign by the side of the trail put there by the park authorities. It 
read:   DANGER.   ALL   STRUCTURES   ARE   UNSTABLE.   I   said   to   my 
friend, “That's a profound sutra [sacred scripture].” And we stood there in 
awe. Once you realize and accept that all structures (forms ) are unstable , 
even   the   seemingly   solid   material   ones,   peace   arises   within  you.   This   is 
because the recognition of the impermanence of all forms awakens you to 
the dimension of the formless within yourself, that which is beyond death. 
Jesus called it “eternal life.”
THE EGO'S NEED TO FEEL SUPERIOR
There are many subtle but easily overlooked forms of ego that you 
may observe in other people and, more important, in yourself. Remember: 
The   moment   you   become   aware   of   the   go   in   yourself,   that   emerging 
awareness is who you are beyond ego, the deeper “I.” The recognition of the 
false is already the arising of the real. 
For   example,   you   are   about   to   tell   someone   the   news   of   what 
happened. “Guess what? You don't know yet? Let me tell you.” If you are 
alert enough, present enough, you may be able to detect a momentary sense 
of satisfaction within yourself just before imparting the news, even if it is bad 
news. It is due to the fact that for a brief moment there is, in the eyes of the 
ego, an imbalance in your favor between you and the other person. For that 
brief moment, you know more than the other. The satisfaction that you feel is 
of the ego, and it is derived from feeling a stronger sense of self relative to 
the other person. Even if he or she is the president or the pope, you feel 
superior in that moment because you know more. Many people are addicted 
to gossiping partly for this reason. In addition, gossiping often carries an 
element   of   malicious   criticism   and   judgment   of   others,   and   so   it   also 
strengthens the ego through the implied but imagined moral superiority that 
is there whenever you apply a negative judgment to anyone.
If someone has more, knows more, or can do more than I, the ego 
feels threatened because the feeling of “less” diminishes its imagined sense 
of self relative to the other. It may then try to restore itself by somehow 
diminishing,   criticizing,   or   belittling   the   value   of   the   other   person's 
possessions, knowledge, or abilities. Or the ego may shift its strategy, and 
instead   of   competing   with   the   other   person,   it   will   enhance   itself   by 
association with that person, if he or she is important in the eyes of others. 
EGO AND FAME
The well­known phenomenon of “name dropping,” the casual mention 
of who you know, is part of the ego's strategy of gaining a superior identity 
in the eyes of others and therefore in its own eyes through association with 
someone “important.” The bane of being famous in this world is that who 
you are becomes totally obscured by a collective mental image. Most people 
you meet want to enhance their identity – the mental image of who they are 
– through association with you. They themselves may not know that they are 
not interested in you at all but only in strengthening their ultimately fictitious 
sense of self. They believe that through you they can be more. They are 
looking to complete themselves through you, or rather through the mental 
image   they   have   of   you   as   a   famous   person,   a   larger­than­life   collective 
conceptual identity.
The   absurd   over­valuation   of   fame   is   just   one   of   the   many 
manifestations of egoic madness in our world. Some famous people fall into 
the same error and identify with the collective fiction, the image people and 
the media have created of them, and they begin to actually see themselves as 
superior   to   ordinary   mortals.   As   a   result,   they   become   more   and   more 
alienated from themselves and others, more and more unhappy, more and 
more dependent on their continuing popularity. Surrounded only by people 
who   feed   their   inflated   self­image,   they   become   incapable   of   genuine 
relationships. 
Albert Einstein, who was admired as almost superhuman and whose 
fate it was to become one of the most famous people on the planet, never 
identified   with   the   image   the   collective   mind   had   created   of   him.   He 
remained humble, egoless. In fact, he spoke of “a grotesque contradiction 
between what people consider to be my achievements and abilities and the 
reality of who I am and what I am capable of.”5
This   is   why   it   is   hard   for   a   famous   person   to   be   in   a   genuine 
relationship with others. A genuine relationship is one that is not dominated 
by the ego with its image­making and self­seeking. In a genuine relationship, 
there is an outward flow of open, alert attention toward the other person in 
which there is no wanting whatsoever. That alert attention is Presence. It is 
the prerequisite of any authentic relationship. The ego always either wants 
something, or if it believes there is nothing to get from the other, it is in a 
state   of   utter   indifference:   It   doesn't   care   about   you.   And   so,   the   three 
predominant   states   of   egoic   relationship   are:   wanting,   thwarted   wanting 
(anger, resentment, blaming, complaining), and indifference. 
CHAPTER FOUR
ROLE­PLAYING: THE MANY FACES OF THE EGO
An ego that wants something from another – and what ego doesn't – will 
usually play some kind of role to get its “needs” met, be they material gain, a 
sense of power, superiority, or specialness, or some kind of gratification, be 
it physical or psychological. Usually people are completely unaware of the 
roles   they   play.   They  are  those   roles.   Some   roles   are   subtle;   others   are 
blatantly obvious, except to the person playing it. Some roles are designed 
simply   to   get   attention   from  others.  The ego thrives  on others'  attention, 
which is after all a form of psychic energy. The ego doesn't know that the 
source of all energy is within you, so it seeks it outside. It is not the formless 
attention which is Presence that the ego seeks, but attention in some form, 
such as recognition, praise, admiration, or just to be noticed in some way, to 
have its existence acknowledged. 
A shy person who is afraid of the attention of others is not free of ego, 
but has an ambivalent ego that both wants and fears attention from others. 
The fear is that the attention may take the form of disapproval or criticism, 
that   is   to   say,   something   that   diminishes   the   sense   of   self   rather   than 
enhances it. So the shy person's fear of attention is greater than his or her 
need   of   attention.   Shyness   often   goes   with   a   self­concept   that   is 
predominantly   negative,   the   belief   of   being   inadequate.   Any   conceptual 
sense of self – seeing myself as this or that  ­ is ego, whether predominantly 
positive (I am the greatest) or negative (I am no good). Behind every positive 
self­concept   is   the   hidden   fear   of   not   being   good   enough.   Behind   every 
negative self­concept its the hidden desire of being the greatest or better than 
others.   Behind   the   confident   ego's   feeling   of   and   continuing   need   for 
superiority   is   the   unconscious   fear   of   inferiority.   Conversely,   the   shy, 
inadequate ego that feels inferior has a strong hidden desire for superiority. 
Many   people   fluctuate   between   feelings   of   inferiority   and   superiority, 
depending on situations or the people they come into contact with. All you 
need to know and observe in yourself is this: whenever you feel superior or 
inferior to anyone, that's the ego in you.  

VILLAIN, VICTIM, LOVER
Some egos, if they cannot get praise or admiration, will settle for other 
forms of attention and play roles to elicit them. If they cannot get positive 
attention,   they   may   seek   negative   attention   instead,   for   example,   by 
provoking a negative reaction in someone else. Some children already do 
that   too.   They   misbehave   to   get   attention.   The   playing   of   negative   roles 
becomes particularly pronounced whenever the ego is magnified by an active 
pain­body, that is to say, emotional pain from the past that wants to renew 
itself through experiencing more pain. Some egos perpetrate crimes in their 
search for fame. They seek attention through notoriety and other people's 
condemnation. “Please tell me that I exist, that I am not insignificant,” they 
seem to say. Such pathological forms of ego are only more extreme versions 
of normal egos.
A very common role is the one of victim, and the form of attention it 
seeks is sympathy or pity or others' interest in  my  problems, “me and my 
story.” Seeing oneself as a victim is an element in many egoic patterns, such 
as complaining, being offended, outraged, and so on. Of course, once I am 
identified with a story in which I assigned myself the role of victim, I don't 
want it to end, and so, as every therapist knows, the ego does not want an 
end to its “problems” because they are part of its identity. If no one will 
listen to my sad story, I can tell it to myself in my head, over and over, and 
feel sorry for myself, sand so have an identity as someone who is being 
treated unfairly by life or other people, fate or God. It gives definition to my 
self­image, makes me into someone, and that is all that matters to the ego.
In   the   early   stages   of   many   so­called   romantic   relationships,   role­
playing is quite common in order to attract and keep whoever is perceived by 
the ego as the one who is going to “make me happy, make me feel special, 
and fulfill all my needs.” “I'll play who you want me to be, and you'll play 
who I want you to be.” That's the unspoken and unconscious agreement. 
However, role­playing is hard work, and so those roles cannot be sustained 
indefinitely, especially once you start living together. When those roles slip, 
what do you see? Unfortunately, in most cases, not yet the true essence of 
that being, but that which overs up the true essence: the raw ego divested of 
its roles, with its pain­body, and its thwarted wanting which now turns into 
anger,   most   likely   directed   at   the   spouse   or   partner   for   having   failed   to 
remove the underlying fear and sense of lack that is an intrinsic part of the 
egoic sense of self.
What   is   commonly   called   “falling   in   love”   is   in   most   cases   and 
intensification   of   egoic   wanting   and   needing.   You   become   addicted   to 
another person, or rather to your image of that person. It has nothing to do 
with true love, which contains no wanting whatsoever. The Spanish language 
is the most honest in regard to conventional notions of love: Te quiero means 
“I want you” as well as “I love you.” The other expression for “I love you,” te 
amo,  which does not have this ambiguity, is rarely used – perhaps because 
true love is just as rare. 
LETTING GO OF SELF­DEFINITIONS
As   tribal   cultures   developed   into   the   ancient   civilizations,   certain 
functions began to be allotted to certain people: ruler, priest or priestess, 
warrior,   farmer,   merchant,   craftsman,   laborer,   and   so   on.   A   class   system 
developed.   Your   function,   which   in   most   cases   you   were   born   into, 
determined your identity, determined who you were in the eyes of others, as 
well   as   in   your   own   eyes.   Your   function   became   a   role,   but   it   wasn't 
recognized as a role: It was who you were, or thought you were. Only rare 
beings at the time, such as the Buddha or Jesus, saw the ultimate irrelevance 
of caste or social class, recognized it as identification with form and saw that 
such identification with the conditioned and the temporal obscured the light 
of the unconditioned and eternal that shines in each human being. 
In our contemporary world, the social structures are less rigid, less 
clearly defined than they used to be. Although most people are, of course, 
still   conditioned   by   their   environment,   they   are   no   longer   automatically 
assigned a function and with it an identity. in fact, in the modern world, more 
and more people are confused as to where they fit in, what their purpose is, 
and even who they are.
I usually congratulate people when they tell me, “I don't know who I 
am anymore.” Then they look perplexed and ask, “Are you saying it is a 
good thing to be confused?” I ask them to investigate. What does it mean to 
be confused? “I don't know “ is not confusion. Confusion is: “I don't know, 
but I should know” or “I don't know, but I need to know.” is it possible to let 
go of the belief that you should or need to know who you are? In other 
words, can you cease looking to conceptual definitions to give you a sense of 
self? Can you cease looking to  thought for an identity? When you let go of 
the belief that you should or need to know who you are, what happens to 
confusion? Suddenly it is gone. When you fully accept that you don't know, 
you actually enter a state of peace and clarity that is closer to who you truly 
are than thought could ever be. Defining yourself through thought is limiting 
yourself. 
PRE­ESTABLISHED ROLES
Of course different people fulfill different functions in this world. It 
cannot be otherwise. As far as intellectual or physical abilities are concerned 
– knowledge, skills, talents, and energy levels – human beings differ widely. 
What really matters is not what function you fulfill in this world, but whether 
you identify with your function to such an extent that it takes you over and 
becomes a role that you play. When you play roles, you are unconscious. 
When   you   catch   yourself   playing a role, that  recognition creates  a space 
between you and the role. It is the beginning of freedom from the role. When 
you are completely identified with a role, you confuse a pattern of behavior 
with   who   you   are,   and   you   take   yourself   very   seriously.   You   also 
automatically   assign   roles   to   others   that   corresponding   to   yours.   For 
example, when you visit doctors who are totally identified with their role, to 
them you will not be a human being but a patient or a case history. 
Although the social structures in the contemporary world are less rigid 
than   in   ancient   cultures,  there  are still   many pre­established  functions  or 
roles that people readily identify with and which thus become part of the 
ego. This causes human interactions to become inauthentic, dehumanized, 
alienating. Those pre­established roles may give you a somewhat comforting 
sense of identity, but ultimately, you lose yourself in them. The functions 
people have in hierarchical organizations, such as the military, the church, a 
government   institution,   or   large   corporation,   easily   lend   themselves   to 
becoming role identities. Authentic human interactions become impossible 
when you lose yourself in a role. 
Some   pre­established   roles   we   could   call   social   archetypes.   To 
mention just a few: the middle­class housewife (not as prevalent as it used to 
be, but still widespread); the tough macho male; the female seductress; the 
“nonconformist”   artist   or   performer;   a   person   of   “culture”   (a   role   quite 
common in Europe) who displays a knowledge of literature, fine art, and 
music in the same way as others might display an expensive dress or car. 
And then there the universal role of adult. When you play that role, you take 
yourself and life very seriously. Spontaneity, lightheartedness, and joy are 
not part of that role. 
The hippie movement that originated on the West Coast of the United 
States in the 1960's and then spread throughout the Western world came out 
of   many   young   people's   rejection   of   social   archetypes,   of   roles,   of   pre­
established   patterns   of   behavior   as   well   as   egoically   based   social   and 
economic structures. They refused to play the roles their parents and society 
wanted to impose on them. Significantly, it coincided with the horrors of the 
Vietnam War, in which more than 57,000 young Americans and 3 million 
Vietnamese   died   and   through   which   the   insanity   of   the   system   and   the 
underlying mind­set was exposed for all to see. Whereas in the 1950s, most 
Americans were still extremely conformist in thought and behavior, in the 
1960s,   millions   of   people   began   to   withdraw   their   identification   with   a 
collective conceptual identity because the insanity of the collective was so 
obvious. The hippie movement represented a loosening of the hitherto rigid 
egoic structures in the psyche of humanity. The movement itself degenerated 
and came to an end, but it left behind an opening, and not just in those who 
were   part   of   the   movement.   This   made   it   possible   for   ancient   Eastern 
wisdom   and   spirituality   to   move   west   and   play   an   essential   part   in   the 
awakening of global consciousness.
TEMPORARY ROLES
If you are awake enough, aware enough, to be able to observe how you 
interact with other people, you may detect subtle changes in your speech, 
attitude, and behavior depending on the person you are interacting with. At 
first, it may be easier to observe this in others, then you may also detect it in 
yourself. The way in which you speak to the chairman of the company may 
be different in subtle ways from how you speak to the janitor. How you speak 
to a child may be different form how you speak to an adult. Why is that? You 
are playing roles. You are not yourself, neither with the chairman nor with 
the janitor or the child. When you walk into a store to buy something, when 
you   go   to   a   restaurant,   the   bank,   the   post   office,   you   may   find   yourself 
slipping into pre­established social roles. You become a customer and speak 
and act as such. And you may be treated by the salesperson or waiter, who is 
also   playing   a   role,   as   a   customer.   A   range   of   conditioned   patterns   of 
behavior   come   into   effect   between  two  human  beings   that  determine  the 
nature of the interaction. Instead of human beings, conceptual mental images 
are  interacting with  each  other. the more identified people are with their 
respective roles, the more inauthentic the relationships become. 
You have a mental image not only of who the other person is, but also 
of who you are, especially in relation to the person you are interacting with. 
So you are not relating with that person oat all, but who you think you are is 
relating to who you think the other person is and vice versa. The conceptual 
image your mind has made of yourself is relating to its own creation, which 
is the conceptual image it has made of the other person. The other person's 
mind has probably done the same, so very egoic interaction between tow 
people   is   in   reality   the   interaction   between   for   conceptual   mind­made 
entities that are ultimately fictions. It is therefore not surprising there is so 
much conflict in relationships. There is no true relationship.
THE MONK WITH SWEATY PALMS
Kasan,  a  Zen  teacher and monk, was to officiate at a funeral  of a 
famous nobleman. As he stood there waiting for the governor of the province 
and other lords and ladies to arrive, he noticed that the palms of his hands 
were sweaty.
The next day he called his disciples together and confessed he was not 
yet ready to be a true teacher. He explained to them that he still lacked the 
sameness of bearing before all human beings, whether beggar or king. He 
was still unable to look through social roles and conceptual identities and see 
the sameness of being in every human. He then left and became the pupil of 
another   master.   He   returned   to   his   former   disciples   eight   years   later, 
enlightened.
HAPPINESS AS A ROLE VS. TRUE HAPPINESS
“How are you?” “Just great. Couldn't be better.” True or false?
In many cases, happiness is a role people play, and behind the smiling 
facade,   there   is   a   great   deal   of   pain.   Depression,   breakdowns,   and 
overreactions are common when unhappiness is covered up behind a smiling 
exterior and brilliant white teeth, when there is denial, sometimes even to 
one's self, that there is much unhappiness.
“Just fine” is a role the ego plays more commonly in America than in 
certain   other   countries   where   being   and   looking   miserable   is   almost   the 
norm and therefore more socially acceptable. It is probably an exaggeration, 
but I am told that in the capital of one Nordic country you run the risk of 
being arrested for drunken behavior if you smile at strangers in the street.
If there is unhappiness in you, first you need to acknowledge that it is 
there. But don't say, “I'm unhappy.” Unhappiness has nothing to do with who 
you are. Say: “There is unhappiness in me.” Then investigate it. A situation 
you   find   yourself   in   may   have   something   to   do   with   it.   Action   may   be 
required   to   change   the   situation   or   remove   yourself   from   it.   If   there   is 
nothing you can do, face what is and say, “Well, right now, this is how it is. I 
can   either   accept   it,   or   make   myself   miserable.”   The   primary   cause   of 
unhappiness is never the situation but your thoughts about it. Be aware of the 
thoughts you are thinking. Separate them from the situation, which is always 
neutral, which always is as it is. There is the situation or the fact, and here 
are my thoughts about it. Instead of making up stories, stay with the facts. 
For example, “I am ruined” is a story. It limits you and prevents you from 
taking effective action. “I have fifty cents left in my bank account” is a fact. 
Facing facts is always empowering. Be aware that what you think, to a large 
extent, creates the emotions that you feel. See the link between your thinking 
and your emotions. Rather than being your thoughts and emotions, be the 
awareness behind them.
Don't seek happiness. If you seek it, you won't find it, because seeing 
is the antithesis of happiness. Happiness is ever elusive, but freedom from 
unhappiness   is   attainable   now,   by   facing   what   is   rather   than   making   up 
stories about it. Unhappiness covers up your natural state of well­being and 
inner peace, the source of true happiness. 
PARENTHOOD: ROLE OR FUNCTION?
Many adults play roles when they speak to young children. They use 
silly words and sounds. They talk down to the child. They don't treat the 
child as an equal. The fact that you temporarily know more or that you are 
bigger does not mean the child is not your equal. The majority of adults, at 
some point in their lives, find themselves being a parent, one of the most 
universal   roles.  The  all­important  question is:  Are  you  able  to fulfill  the 
function of being a parent, and fulfill it well, without identifying with that 
function, that is, without it becoming a role? Part of the necessary function 
of being a parent is looking after the needs of the child, preventing the child 
from getting into danger, and at times telling the child what to do and not to 
do. When being a parent becomes an identity, however, when your sense of 
self   is   entirely   or   largely   derived   from   it,   the   function   easily   becomes 
overemphasized, exaggerated, and takes you over. Giving children what they 
need   becomes   excessive   and   turns   into   spoiling;   preventing   them   from 
getting   into   danger   becomes   overprotectiveness   and   interferes   with   their 
need to explore the world and try things out  for themselves. Telling children 
what to do or not to do becomes controlling, overbearing. 
What is more, the role­playing identity remains in place long after the 
need for those particular functions has passed. Parents then cannot let go of 
being a parent even when the child grows into an adult. They can't let go of 
the need to be needed by their child. Even when the adult child is forty years 
old, parents can't let go of the notion I know what's best for you.” The role of 
parent   is   still   being   played   compulsively,   and   so   there   is   no   authentic 
relationship. Parents define themselves by that role and are unconsciously 
afraid of loss of identity when they cease being parents. If their desire to 
control or influence the actions of their adult child is thwarted – as it usually 
is – they will start to criticize or show their disapproval, or try to make the 
child feel guilty, all in an unconscious attempt to preserve their role, their 
identity. On the surface it looks as if they were concerned about their child, 
and   they   themselves   believe   it,   but   they   are   only   really   concerned   about 
preserving   their   role­identity.   All   egoic   motivations   are   self­enhancement 
and   self­interest,   sometimes   cleverly   disguised,   even   from   the   person   in 
whom the ego operates. 
A mother or father who identifies with the parental role may also try 
to   become   more   complete   through   their   children.   The   ego's   need   to 
manipulate others into filling the sense of lack it continuously feels is then 
directed   toward   them.   If   the   mostly   unconscious   assumptions   and 
motivations behind the parent's compulsion to manipulate their children were 
made conscious and voiced, they would probably include some or all of the 
following: “I want you to achieve what I never achieved; I want you to be 
somebody in the eyes of the world, so that I too can be somebody through 
you. Don't disappoint me. I sacrificed so much for you. My disapproval of 
you is intended to make you feel so guilty and uncomfortable that you finally 
conform to my wishes. And it goes without saying that I know what's best 
for you. I love you and I will continue to love you if you do what I now is 
right for you.”
When   you   make   such   unconscious   motivations   conscious,   you 
immediately see how absurd they are. the ego that lies behind them becomes 
visible,   as   does   its   dysfunction.   Some   parents   that   I   spoke   to   suddenly 
realized, “My God, is this what I have been doing?” Once you see what you 
are doing or have been doing, you also see its futility, and that unconscious 
pattern then comes to an end by itself. Awareness is the greatest agent for 
change. 
If   your   parents   are   doing   this   to   you,   do   not   tell   them   they   are 
unconscious and in the grip of the ego. That will likely make them even 
more unconscious, because the ego will take up a defensive position. It is 
enough for you to recognize that it is the ego in them, that it is not who they 
are.   Egoic   patterns,   even   long­standing   ones,   sometimes   dissolve   almost 
miraculously when you don't oppose them internally. Opposition only gives 
them  renewed  strength.  But  even if they don't, you can then accept  your 
parents' behavior with compassion, without needing to react to it, that is to 
say, without personalizing it. 
Be aware also of your own unconscious assumptions or expectations 
that   lie  behind   your   old,   habitual   reactions   to  them.  “My   parents  should 
approve of what I do. They should understand me and accept me for who I 
am.” Really? Why should they? The fact is they don't because they can't. 
Their evolving consciousness hasn't made the quantum leap to the level of 
awareness yet. They are not yet able to disidentify from their role. “Yes, but I 
can't feel happy and comfortable with who I am unless I have their approval 
and   understanding.”   Really?   What   difference   does   their   approval   or 
disapproval truly make to who you are? All such unexamined assumptions 
cause a great deal of negative emotion, much unnecessary unhappiness.
Be alert.  Are some  of the thoughts that go through your mind the 
internalized voice of your father or mother, saying perhaps something like, 
“You are not good enough. You will never amount to anything,” or some 
other judgment or mental position? If there is awareness in you, you will be 
able   to   recognize  that   voice in your head for  what  it  is: an old thought, 
conditioned by the past. If there is awareness in you, you no longer need to 
believe in every thought you think. It's an old thought, no more. Awareness 
means   Presence,   and   only   Presence  can  dissolve  the  unconscious   past  in 
you.”
“If you think you are so enlightened,” Ram Dass said, “go and spend a 
week with your parents.” That is good advice. The relationship with your 
parents   is   not   only   the   primordial   relationship   hat   sets   the   tone   for   all 
subsequent relationships, it is also a good test for your degree of Presence. 
The more shared past there is in a relationship, the more present you need to 
be; otherwise, you will be forced to relive the past again and again.
CONSCIOUS SUFFERING
If you have young children, give them help, guidance, and protection 
to the best f your ability, but even more important, give them space – space 
to be. They come into this world through you, but they are not “yours.” The 
belief “I know what's best for you” may be true when they are very young, 
bu the older they get, the less true it becomes. The more expectations you 
have of how their life should unfold, the more you are in your mind instead 
of being present for them. Eventually, they will make mistakes, and they will 
experience some form of suffering, as all humans do. In fact, they may be 
mistakes   only   from   your   perspective.   What   to   you   is   a   mistake   may   be 
exactly what your children need to do or experience. Give them as much help 
and guidance as you can, but realize that you may also at times have to allow 
them   to   make   mistakes,   especially   as   they   begin   to   reach   adulthood.   At 
times, you may also have to allow them to suffer. Suffering may come to 
them   out   of   the   blue   or   it   may   come   as   the   consequence   of   their   own 
mistakes. 
Wouldn't it be wonderful if you could spare them from all suffering? 
No, it wouldn't. They would not evolve as human beings and would remain 
shallow,  identified  with  the  external form of things. Suffering drives you 
deeper. The paradox is that suffering is caused by identification with form 
and erodes identification with form. A lot of it is caused by the ego, although 
eventually suffering destroys the ego – but not until you suffer consciously.
Humanity is destined to go beyond suffering, but not in the way the 
ego thinks. One of the ego's many erroneous assumptions, one of its many 
deluded thoughts is “I should not have to suffer.” Sometimes the thought gets 
transferred to someone close to you: “My child should not have to suffer.” 
That   thought   itself   lies   at   the   root   of   suffering.   Suffering   has   a   noble 
purpose: the evolution of consciousness and the burning up of the ego. the 
man on the Cross is an archetypal image. He is every man and every woman. 
As long as you resist suffering, it is a slow process because the resistance 
creates more ego to burn up. When you accept suffering, however, there is an 
acceleration of that process which is brought about by the fact that you suffer 
consciously. You can accept suffering for yourself, or you can accept it for 
someone   else,   such   as   your   child   or   parent.   In   the   midst   of   conscious 
suffering, there is already the transmutation. The fire of suffering becomes 
the light of consciousness.
The ego says, “I shouldn't have to suffer,” and that thought makes you 
suffer   so   much   more.   It   is   a   distortion   of   the   truth,   which   is   always 
paradoxical. The truth is that you need to say yes to suffering before you can 
transcend it. 
CONSCIOUS PARENTING
Many   children   harbor   hidden   anger   and   resentment   toward   their 
parents and often the cause is inauthenticity in the relationship. The child 
has a deep longing for the parent to be there as a human being, not as a role, 
no matter how conscientiously that role is being played. you may be doing 
all the right things and the best you can for your child, but even doing the 
best you can is not enough.  In fact, doing is never enough if you neglect 
Being. The ego knows nothing of being but believes you will eventually be 
saved by doing. If you are in the grip of the ego, you believe that by doing 
more and more you will eventually accumulate enough “doings” to make 
yourself feel complete at some point in the future. You won't. You will only 
lose yourself in doing. The entire civilization is losing itself in doing that is 
not rooted in Being and thus becomes futile.
How   do   you   bring   Being   into   the   life   of   a   busy   family,   into   the 
relationship with your child? The key is to give your child attention. There 
are  two   kinds  of  attention.   One  we might   call  form­based  attention. The 
other   is   formless   attention.   Form­based   attention   is   always   connected   in 
some way with doing or evaluation. “Have you done your homework? Eat 
your dinner. Tidy up your room. Brush your teeth. Do this. Stop doing that. 
Hurry up, get ready.”
What's   the   next   thing   we   have   to   do?   This   question   pretty   much 
summarizes what family life is like in many homes. Form­based attention is 
of   course   necessary   and   has   its   place,   but   if   that's   all   there   is   in   the 
relationship with your child, then the most vital dimension is missing and 
Being becomes completely obscured by doing, by “the cares of the world,” 
as  Jesus  puts it.  Formless  attention is inseparable from  the dimension of 
Being. How does it work?
As you look at, listen to, touch, or help your child with this or that, 
you are alert, still, completely present, not wanting anything other than that 
moment as it is. in this way, you make room for Being. In that moment, if 
you are present, you are not a father or mother. You are the alertness, the 
stillness,   the   Presence  that   is  listening, looking, touching,  even speaking. 
You are the Being behind the doing.
RECOGNIZING YOUR CHILD
You are a human being. What does that mean? Mastery of life is not a 
question   of   control,   but   of   finding a  balance between human and Being. 
Mother, father, husband, wife, young, old, the roles you play, the functions 
you fulfill, whatever you do – all that belongs to the human dimension. It has 
its place and needs to be honored, but in itself it is not enough for a fulfilled, 
truly   meaningful   relationship   or   life.   Human   alone   is   never   enough,   no 
matter how hard you try or what you achieve. Then there is Being. it is found 
in the still, alert presence of Consciousness itself, the Consciousness that 
you   are.   Human   is   form.   Being   is   formless.   Human   and   Being   are   not 
separate but interwoven. 
In   the   human   dimension,   you   are   unquestionably   superior   to   your 
child. You are bigger, stronger, know more, can do more. If that dimension is 
all you know, you will feel superior to your child, if only unconsciously. And 
you will make your child feel inferior, if only unconsciously. There is no 
equality   between   you   and   your   child   because   there   is   only   form   in   your 
relationship, and in form, you are of course not equal. You may love your 
child, but your live will be human only, that is to say, conditional, possessive, 
intermittent. Only beyond form, in Being, are you equal, and only When you 
find   the   formless   dimension   in   yourself   can   there   be   true   love   in   that 
relationship. The Presence that you are, the timeless I Am, recognizes itself 
in another, and the other, the child in this case, feels loved, that is to say, 
recognized.
To love is to recognize yourself in another. The other's “otherness” 
then stands revealed as an illusion pertaining to the purely human realm, the 
realm of form. The longing for love that is in every child is the longing to be 
recognized, not on the level of form, but on the level of Being. If parents 
honor only the human dimension of the child but neglect Being, the child 
will sense that the relationship is unfulfilled, that something absolutely vital 
is missing, and there will be a buildup of pain in the child and sometimes 
unconscious resentment toward the parents. “Why don't you recognize me?” 
This is what the pain or resentment seems to be saying. 
When another recognizes you, that recognition draws the dimension of 
Being more fully into this world through both of you. That is the love that 
redeems the world. I have been speaking of this with specific reference to the 
relationship   with   your   child,   but   it   equally   applies,   of   course,   to   all 
relationships. 
It has been said “God is love” but that is not absolutely correct. God is 
the One Life in and beyond the countless forms of life. Love implies duality: 
lover and beloved, subject and object. so love is the recognition of oneness in 
the world of duality. This is the birth of God into the world of form. Love 
makes   the   world   less   worldly,   less   dense,  more   transparent   to   the   divine 
dimension, the light of consciousness itself. 
GIVING UP ROLE­PLAYING
To do whatever is required of you in any situation without it becoming 
a role that you identify with is an essential lesson in the art of living that 
each one of us is here to learn. You become most powerful in whatever you 
do if the action is performed for its own sake rather than as a means to 
protect, enhance, or conform to your role identity. Every role is a fictitious 
sense   of   self,   and   through   it   everything   becomes   personalized   and   thus 
corrupted and distorted by the mind­made “little me” and whatever role it 
happens to be playing. Most of the people who are in positions of power in 
this   world,   such   as   politicians,   TV   personalities,   business   as   a   well   as 
religious leaders, are completely identified with their role, with a few notable 
exceptions.   They   may   be   considered   VIPs,   but     they   are   no   more   than 
unconscious players in the egoic game, a game that looks so important yet is 
ultimately devoid of true purpose. It is, in the words of Shakespeare, “a tale 
told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.”1  Amazingly, 
Shakespeare   arrived   at   this   conclusion   without   having   the   benefit   of 
television. If the egoic earth drama has any purpose at all, it is an indirect 
one:   It   creates   more   and   more   suffering   on   the   planet,   and   suffering, 
although largely ego­created, is in the end also ego­destructive. It is the fire 
in which the ego burns itself up.
In a world of role playing personalities, those few people who don't 
project a mind made image – and other are some even on TV, in the media, 
and the business world – but function from the deeper core of their Being, 
those   who   do   not   attempt   to   appear   more   than   they   are   but   are   simply 
themselves, stand out as remarkable and are the only ones who truly make a 
difference in this world. They are the bringers of the new consciousness. 
Whatever they do becomes empowered because it is in alignment with the 
purpose of the whole. Their influence, however, goes far beyond what they 
do,   far   beyond   their   function.   Their   mere   presence   –   simple,   natural, 
unassuming   –   has   a   transformational   effect   on   whoever   they   come   into 
contact with.
When you don't play roles, it means there is no self (ego) in what you 
do. There is no secondary agenda: protection or strengthening of yourself. 
As a result, your actions have far greater power. You are totally focused on 
the   situation.   You   become   one   with   it.   You   don't   try   to   be   anybody   in 
particular. You are most powerful, most effective, when you are completely 
yourself. But don't try to be yourself That's another role. It's called “natural, 
spontaneous me.” As soon as yo are trying to be this or that, you are playing 
a role. “Just be yourself” is good advice, but it can also be misleading. the 
mind will come in and say, “Let's see. How can I be myself?” Then, the mind 
will develop some kind of strategy: “How to be myself.” Another role. “How 
can I be myself?” is, in fact, the wrong yourself. It implies you have to do 
something   to   be   yourself.   But   how   doesn't   apply   here   because   you   are 
yourself already. Just stop adding unnecessary baggage to who you already 
are. “But I don't know who I am. I don't know what it means to be myself.” If 
you   can   be   absolutely   comfortable   with   not   knowing   who   you   are,   then 
what's left is who you are – the Being behind the human, a field of pure 
potentiality other than something that is already defined. 
Give up defining yourself – to yourself or to others. You won't die. 
You will come to life. And don't be concerned with how others define you. 
When they define you, they are limiting themselves, so it's their problem. 
Whenever you interact with people, don't be there primarily as a function or 
a role, but as a field of conscious Presence.
Why does the ego play roles? Because of one unexamined assumption, 
one fundamental error, one unconscious thought. That thought is: I am not 
enough. Other unconscious thoughts follow: I need to play a role in order to 
get what I need to be fully myself; I need to get more so that I can be more. 
But you cannot be more than you are because underneath your physical and 
psychological form, you are one with Life itself, one with Being. In form, 
you are and will always be inferior to some, superior to others. In essence, 
you are neither inferior nor superior to anyone. True self­esteem and true 
humility arise out of that realization. In the eyes of the ego, self­esteem and 
humility are contradictory. In truth, they are one and the same. 
THE PATHOLOGICAL EGO
In a wider sense of the word, the ego itself is pathological, no matter 
what form it takes. When we look at the ancient Greek root of the word 
pathological, we discover just how appropriate that term is when applied to 
the   ego.   Although   the   word   is   normally   used   to   describe   a   condition   of 
disease, it is derived from pathos, which means suffering. This is, of course, 
exactly   what   the   Buddha   already   discovered   2,600   years   ago   as   a 
characteristic of the human condition.
A person in the grip of ego, however, does not recognize suffering as 
suffering, but will look upon it as the only appropriate response in any given 
situation.   The   ego   in   is   blindness   is   incapable   of   seeing   the   suffering   it 
inflicts   on   itself   and   on   others.   Unhappiness   is   an   ego­created   mental­
emotional   disease   that   has   reached   epidemic   proportions.   It   is   the   inner 
equivalent of the environmental pollution of our planet. Negative states, such 
as anger, anxiety, hatred, resentment, discontent, envy, jealousy, and so on, 
are   not   recognized   as   negative   but   as   totally   justified   and   are   further 
misperceived   not   as  self­created but  as caused by someone else  or  some 
external factor. “I am holding you responsible for my pain.” This is what by 
implication the ego is saying. 
The ego cannot distinguish between a situation and its interpretation 
of   and   reaction   to   that   situation.   You   might   say,  “What   a   dreadful   day,” 
without realizing that the cold, the wind, and the rain or whatever condition 
you react to are not dreadful. They are as they are. What is dreadful is your 
reaction, your inner resistance to it, and the emotion that is created by That 
resistance. In Shakespeare's words, “There is nothing either good or bad, but 
thinking   makes   it   so.”2  What   is   more,   suffering   or   negativity   is   often 
misperceived   by   the   ego   as   pleasure   because   up   t   the   point   the   ego 
strengthens itself through it.
For example, anger or resentment strengthen the ego enormously by 
increasing the sense of separateness, emphasizing the otherness of others 
and   creating   a   seemingly   unassailable   fortress­like   mental   position   of 
“rightness.” If you were able to observe the physiological changes that take 
place inside your body when possessed by such negative states, how they 
adversely   affect   the   functioning   of   the   heart,   the   digestive   and   immune 
systems, and countless other bodily functions, it would become abundantly 
clear that such states are indeed pathological, are forms of suffering and not 
pleasure.
Whenever you are in a negative state, there is something in you that 
wants the negativity, that perceives it as pleasurable, or that believes it will 
get you what you want. Otherwise, who would want to hang on to negativity, 
make themselves and others miserable, and create disease in the body? So, 
whenever there is negativity n you, if you can be aware at that moment that 
there is something in you that takes pleasure in it or believes it has a useful 
purpose   you   are   becoming   aware   of   the   ego   directly.   The   moment   this 
happens, your identity has shifted from ego to awareness. This means the 
ego is shrinking and awareness is growing.
If in the midst of negativity you are able to realize “At this moment I 
am creating suffering form myself” it will be enough to raise you above the 
limitations of conditioned egoic states and reactions. It will open up infinite 
possibilities which come to you when there is awareness ­ other vastly more 
intelligent ways of dealing with any situation. You will be free to let go of 
your unhappiness the moment you recognize it as unintelligent. Negativity is 
not intelligent. It is always of the ego. The ego may be clever, but it is not 
intelligent. Cleverness pursues its own little aims. Intelligence sees the larger 
whole  in   which   all   things  are connected. Cleverness  is motivated y self­
interest,   and   it   is   extremely   short­sighted.   Most   politicians   and 
businesspeople   are   clever.   Very   few   are   intelligent.   Whatever   is   attained 
through cleverness is short­lived and always turns out to be eventually self­
defeating. Cleverness divides; intelligence unites.
THE BACKGROUND UNHAPPINESS
The ego creates separation, and separation creates suffering. The ego 
is therefore clearly pathological. Apart from the obvious ones such as anger, 
hatred, and so on, there are other more subtle forms of negativity that are so 
common they are usually not recognized as sch, for example, impatience, 
irritation, nervousness, and being “fed up.” They constitute the background 
unhappiness that is many people's predominant inner state. You need to be 
extremely alert and absolutely present to be able to detect them. Whenever 
you do, it is a moment of awakening, of disidentification from the mind. 
Here   is   one   of   the   most   common   negative   states   that   is   easily 
overlooked,   precisely   because   it   is   so   common,   so   normal.   You   may   be 
familiar with it. Do you often experience a feeling of discontent that could 
best   be   described   as   a   kind  of   background  resentment?  It  may  be  either 
specific or nonspecific. Many people spend a large part of their lives in that 
state. They are so identified with it that they cannot stand back and see it. 
Underlying that feeling are certain unconsciously held beliefs, that is to say, 
thoughts. You think these thoughts in the same way that you dream your 
dreams   when   you   are   asleep.   In   other   words,   you   don't   know   you   are 
thinking those thoughts, just as the dreamer doesn't know he is dreaming. 
Here are some of the most common unconscious thoughts that feed 
the feeling of discontent or background resentment. I have stripped away the 
content from those thoughts so that the bare structure remains. They become 
more   clearly   visible   that   way.   Whenever   there   is   unhappiness   in   the 
background of your life (or even in the foreground), you can see which of 
these   thoughts   applies   and   fill   in   your   own   content   according   to   your 
personal situation:
“There is something that needs to happen in my life before I can be at  
peace (happy, fulfilled, etc.). And I resent that it hasn't happened yet. Maybe  
my resentment will  finally make it happen.”
“Something happened in the past that should not have happened, and  
I resent that. If that hadn't happened, I would be at peace now.”
“Something is happening now that should not be happening, and it is  
preventing me from being at peace now.”
Often   the   unconscious   beliefs   are  directed   toward  a   person   and  so 
“happening” becomes “doing”:
“You should do this or that so that I can be at peace. And I resent that  
you haven't done it yet. Maybe my resentment will make you do it.”
“Something   you   (or   I)   did,   said,   or   failed   to   do   in   the   past   is  
preventing me from being at peace now.”
“What you are doing or failing to do now is preventing me from being  
at peace.”

THE SECRET OF HAPPINESS
All   of   the   above   are   assumptions,   unexamined   thoughts   that   are 
confused with reality. They are stories the ego crates to convince you that 
you cannot be at peace now or cannot be fully yourself now. Being at peace 
and being who you are, that is, being yourself, are one.The ego says: Maybe 
at some point in the future, I can be at peace – and if this, that, or the other 
happens, or I obtain this or become that. Or it says: I can never be at peace 
because of something that happened in the past. Listen to people's stories 
and they could all be entitled “Why I Cannot Be At Peace Now.” The ego 
doesn't know that your only opportunity for being at peace is now. Or maybe 
it does know, and it is afraid that you may find this out. Peace, after all, is the 
end of the ego.
How to be at peace now? By making peace with the present moment. 
The present moment is the field on which he game of life happens. It cannot 
happen anywhere else. Once you have made peace with the present moment, 
see what happens,  what you can do or choose to do, or rather what life does 
through you. There are three words that convey the secret of the art of living, 
the secret of all success and happiness: One With Life. Being one with life is 
bing one with Now. You then realize that you don't live your life, but life 
lives you. Life is the dancer, and you are the dance. 
The ego loves its resentment of reality. What is reality? Whatever is. 
Buddha called it  tatata  – the suchness of life, which is no more than the 
suchness of this moment. Opposition toward that suchness is one of the main 
features   of   the   ego.   It   creates   the   negativity   that   the   ego  thrives   on,   the 
unhappiness that it loves. In this way, you make yourself and others suffer 
and don't even know that you are doing it, don't know that you are creating 
hell on earth. To create suffering without recognizing it – this is the essence 
of unconscious living; this is being totally in the grip of the ego. The extent 
of the ego's inability to recognize itself and see what it is doing is staggering 
and unbelievable. It will do exactly what it condemns others for and not see 
it. When it is pointed out, it will use angry denial, clever arguments, and 
self­justifications   to   distort   the   facts.   People   do   it,   corporations   do   it, 
governments do it. When all else fails, the ego will resort to shouting or even 
to physical violence. Send in the marines. We can now understand the deep 
wisdom in Jesus' words on the cross: “Forgive them for they know not what 
they do.”
To   end   the   misery   that   has   afflicted   the   human   condition   for 
thousands of years, you have to start with yourself and take responsibility for 
your inner state at any given moment. That means now. Ask yourself, “Is 
there negativity an me at this moment?” Then, become alert, attentive to 
your   thoughts   as   well   as   your   emotions.   Watch   out   for   the   low­level 
unhappiness in whatever form at hat I mentioned earlier, such as discontent, 
nervousness, being “fed up,” and so on. Watch out for thoughts that appear to 
justify or explain this unhappiness but in reality cause it. The moment you 
become aware of a negative state within yourself, it does not mean you have 
failed. It means that you have succeeded. until that awareness happens, there 
is   identification   with   inner   states,   and   such   identification   is   ego.   With 
awareness comes disidentification from thoughts, emotions, and reactions. 
This is not to be confused with denial. The thoughts, emotions, or reactions 
are recognized, and in the moment of recognizing, disidentification happens 
automatically. Your sense of self, of who you are, then undergoes a shift: 
Before   you   were   the   thoughts,   emotions   and   reactions;   now   you   are   the 
awareness, the conscious Presence that witnesses those states.
“One day I will be free of the ego.” Who is talking? The ego. To 
become free of the ego is not really a big job but a very small one. All you 
need to do is be aware of your thoughts and emotions – as they happen. This 
is not really a “doing,” but an alert “seeing.” In that sense, it is true that there 
is nothing you can do to become free of the ego. When that shift happens, 
which is the shift from thinking to awareness, an intelligence far greater than 
the   ego's   cleverness   begins   to   operate   in   your   life.   Emotions   and   even 
thoughts become depersonalized through awareness. Their impersonal nature 
is   recognized.   there   is   no   longer   a   self   in   them.   They   are   just   human 
emotions, human thoughts. Your entire personal history, which is ultimately 
no   more   than   a   story,   a   bundle   of   thoughts   and   emotions,   becomes   of 
secondary   importance   and   no   longer   occupies   the   forefront   of   your 
consciousness. It no longer forms the basis for your sense of identity. you are 
the light  of  Presence,  the  awareness that is prior to and deeper than any 
thoughts and emotions.
PATHOLOGICAL FROMS OF EGO
As we have seen, the ego is in its essential nature pathological, if we 
use the word in its wider sense to denote dysfunction and suffering. Many 
mental disorders consist of the same egoic traits that operate in a normal 
person, except that they have become so pronounced that their pathological 
nature is now obvious to anyone, except the sufferer. 
For example, many normal people tell certain kinds of lies from time 
to time in order to appear more important, more special, and to enhance this 
image   in   the   mind   of   others:   who   they   know,   what   their   achievements, 
abilities,   and   possessions  are, and whatever else  the  ego uses  to identify 
with. Some people, however, driven by the ego's feeling of insufficiency and 
its need to have or be “more,” lie habitually and compulsively. Most of what 
they tell you about themselves, their story, is a complete fantasy, a fictitious 
edifice the ego has designed for itself to feel bigger, more special. Their 
grandiose and inflated self­image can sometimes fool others, but usually not 
for long. It is then quickly recognized by most people as a compete fiction.
The mental illness that is called paranoid schizophrenia, or paranoia 
for short, is essentially an exaggerated form of ego. It usually consists of a 
fictitious   story   the   mind   has   invented   to   make   sense   of   a   persistent 
underlying feeling of fear. The main element of the story is the belief that 
certain people (sometimes large numbers or almost everyone) are plotting 
against me, or are conspiring to control or kill me. The story often has an 
inner consistency and logic so that it sometimes fools others into believing it 
too. Sometimes organizations or entire nations have paranoid belief systems 
at their very basis. The ego's fear and distrust of other people, its tendency to 
emphasize the “otherness” of others by focusing on their perceived faults 
and make those faults into their identity, is taken a little further and makes 
others into inhuman monsters. The ego needs others, but its dilemma is that 
deep   down   it   hates   and   fears   them.  Jean­Paul  Sartre's   statement   “Hell   is 
other people” is the voice of the ego. The person suffering from paranoia 
experiences that hell most acutely, but everyone in whom the egoic patterns 
still operate will feel it to some degree. The stronger the ego in you, the more 
likely   it   is   that   in   your   perception   other   people   are   the   main   source   of 
problems in your life. It is also more than likely that you will make life 
difficult for others. But, of course, you won't be able to see that. It is always 
others who seem to be doing it to you.
The mental illness we call paranoia also manifests another symptom 
that is an element of every ego, although in paranoia it takes on a more 
extreme form. The more the sufferer sees himself persecuted, spied on, or 
threatened by others, the more pronounced becomes his sense of being the 
center   of   the   universe   around   whom   everything   revolves,   and   the   more 
special   and   important   he   feels   as   the   imagined   focal   point   of   so   many 
people's attention. His sense of being a victim, of being wronged by so many 
people, makes him feel very special. In the story that forms the basis of his 
delusional system, he often assigns to himself the role of both victim and 
potential hero who is going to save the world or defeat the forces of evil.
The collective ego of tribes, nations, and religious organizations also 
frequently contains a strong element of paranoia: us against the evil others. It 
is   the   cause   of   much   human   suffering.   Th   Spanish   Inquisition,   the 
persecution   and   burning   of   heretics   and   “witches,”   the   relations   between 
nations   leading   up   to   the   First   and   Second   World   wars,   Communism 
throughout   its   history,   the   “Cold   War,”   McCarthyism   in   America   in   the 
1950's, prolonged violent conflict in the Middle East are all painful episodes 
in human history dominated by extreme collective paranoia.
The more unconscious individuals, groups, or nations are, the more 
likely it is that egoic pathology will assume the form of physical violence. 
Violence   is   a   primitive   but   still   very   widespread   way   in   which   the   ego 
attempts to assert itself, to prove itself right and another wrong. With very 
unconscious people, arguments can easily lead to physical violence. What is 
an argument? Two or more people express their opinions and those opinions 
differ.   Each   person   is  so   identified with the thoughts  that  make up their 
opinion, that those thoughts harden into mental positions which are invested 
with a sense of self. In other words: Identity and thought merge. Once this 
has happened, when I defend my opinions (thoughts), I feel and act as if  I 
were   defending   my   very   self.   Unconsciously,   I   feel   and   act   as   if   I   were 
fighting for survival and so my emotions will reflect this unconscious belief. 
they become turbulent. I am upset, angry, defensive, or aggressive. I need to 
win at all costs lest I become annihilated. That's the illusion. The ego doesn't 
know that mind and mental positions have nothing to do with who you are 
because the ego is he unobserved mind itself.
In Zen they say: “Don't seek the truth. Just cease to cherish opinions.” 
What does that mean? Let go of identification with your mind. Who you are 
beyond the mind then emerges by itself.
WORK – WITH AND WITHOUT EGO
Most people have moments when they are free of ego. Those who are 
exceptionally good at what they do may be completely or largely free of ego 
while   performing   their   work.   They   may   not   know   it,   but   their   work   has 
become a spiritual practice. Most of them are present while they do their 
work and fall back into relative unconsciousness in their private life. This 
means their state of Presence is for the time being confined to one area of 
their   life.   I   have   met   teachers,   artists,   nurses,   doctors,   scientists,   social 
workers,   waiters,   hairdressers,   business   owners,   and   salespeople   who 
perform their work admirably without any self­seeking, fully responding to 
whatever the moment requires of them. They are one with what they do, one 
with the Now, one with the people or the task they serve. The influence such 
people have upon others goes far beyond the function they perform. They 
bring about a lessening of the ego in everyone who comes into contact with 
them. Even people with heavy egos sometimes begin to relax, let down their 
guard, and stop playing their roles when they interact with them. It comes as 
no   surprise   that   those   people   who   work   without   ego   are   extraordinarily 
successful at what they do. Anybody who is one with what he or she does is 
building the new earth. 
I have also met many others who may be technically good at what they 
do   but   whose   ego   constantly   sabotages   their   work.   Only   part   of   their 
attention is on the work they perform; the other part is on themselves. Their 
ego   demands   personal   recognition   and   wastes   energy   in   resentment   if   it 
doesn't get enough – and it's never enough. “Is someone else getting more 
recognition than me?” Or their main focus of attention is profit or power, and 
their work is no more than a means to that end. When work is no more than a 
means to an end, it cannot be of high quality. When obstacles or difficulties 
arise in their work, when things don't go according to expectation, when 
other   people   or   circumstances   are   not   helpful   or   cooperative,   instead   of 
immediately   becoming   one  with the new situation and responding to the 
requirements of the present moment, they react against the situation and so 
separate themselves from it. There is a “me” that feels personally offended or 
resentful, and a huge amount of energy is burned up in useless protest or 
anger, energy that could be used for solving the situation if it were not being 
misused by the ego. What is more, this “anti”­energy creates new obstacles, 
new opposition. Many people are truly their own worst enemy.
People   unknowingly   sabotage   their   own   work   when   they   withhold 
help or information from others or try to undermine them lest they become 
more successful or get more credit than “me.” Cooperation is alien to the 
ego, except when there is a secondary motive. The ego doesn't know that the 
more you include others, the more smoothly things flow and the more easily 
things come to you. When you give little or no help to others or put obstacles 
in their path, the universe – in the form of people and circumstances – gives 
little or no help to you because you have cut yourself off from the whole. 
The ego's  unconscious  core feeling of “not enough” causes it to react to 
someone else's success as if that success had taken something away from 
“me.”   It   doesn't   know   that   your   resentment   of   another   person's   success 
curtails your own chances of success. In order to attract success, you need to 
welcome it wherever you see it. 
THE EGO IN ILLNESS
An illness can either strengthen or weaken the ego. If you complain, 
feel self­pity, or resent being ill, your ego becomes stronger. It also becomes 
stronger  if  you  make  the  illness  art of your conceptual identity: “I  am a 
sufferer of such and such a disease.” Ah, so now we know who you are. 
Some people, on the other hand, who in normal life have a big ego, suddenly 
become gentle and kind and much nicer people when they are ill. They may 
gain insights they may never have had in their normal life. They may access 
their inner  knowing  and  contentment  and speak words of wisdom. Then, 
when they get better, energy returns and so does the ego. 
When you are ill, your energy level is quite low, and the intelligence of 
the organism may take over and use the remaining energy for the healing of 
the body, and so there is not enough left for the mind, that is to say, egoic 
thinking and emotion. The ego burns up considerable amounts of energy. In 
some cases, however, the ego retains the little energy that remains and uses it 
for   its   own   purposes.   Needless   to   say,   those   people   who   experience   a 
strengthening of the ego in illness take much longer to recover. Some never 
do, and so the illness becomes chronic and a permanent part of their false 
sense of self. 
THE COLLECTIVE EGO
How hard it is to live with yourself! One of the ways in which the ego 
attempts to escape the unsatisfactoriness of personal self­hood is to enlarge 
and strengthen its sense of self by identifying with a group – a nation, a 
political party, corporation, institution, sect, club, gang, football team.
In   some   cases   the   personal   ego   seems   to   dissolve   completely   as 
someone dedicates his or her life to working selflessly for the greater good 
of   the   collective   without   demanding   personal   rewards,   recognition,   or 
aggrandizement. What a relief to be freed of the dreadful burden of personal 
self. The members of the collective feel happy and fulfilled, no matter how 
hard they work, how many sacrifices they make. They appear to have gone 
beyond ego. The question is: Have they truly become free, or has the ego 
simply shifted from the personal to the collective?
A  collective  ego  manifests the same characteristics as the personal 
ego, such as the need for conflict and enemies, the need for more, the need to 
be   right   against   others   who   are   wrong,   and   so   on.   Sooner   or   later,   the 
collective   will   come   into   conflict   with   other   collectives,   because   it 
unconsciously seeks conflict and it needs opposition to define its boundary 
and   thus  its  identity.  Its  members will  then experience the suffering that 
inevitably comes in the wake of any ego­motivated action. At that point, they 
may   wake   up   and   realize   that   their   collective   has   a   strong   element   of 
insanity. 
It   can   be  painful   at   first   to  suddenly  wake up  and realize that  the 
collective you had identified with and worked for is actually insane. Some 
people at that point become cynical or bitter and henceforth deny all values, 
all worth. This means that they quickly adopted another belief system when 
the previous one was recognized as illusory and therefore collapsed. They 
didn't face the death of their ego but ran away and reincarnated into a new 
one.
A collective ego is usually more unconscious than the individuals that 
make up that ego. For example crowds (which are temporary collective egoic 
entities) are capable of committing atrocities that the individual away from 
the crowd would not be. Nations not infrequently engage in behavior that 
would be immediately recognizable as psychopathic in an individual.
As the new consciousness emerges, some people will feel called upon 
to form groups that reflect the enlightened consciousness. These groups will 
not be collective egos. The individuals who make up these groups will have 
no need to define their identity through them. They no longer look to any 
form to define who they are. Even if the members that make up those groups 
are not totally free of ego yet, there will be enough awareness in them to 
recognize the ego in themselves or in others as soon as it appears. However, 
constant alertness is required since the ego will try to take over and reassert 
itself in any way it can. Dissolving the human ego by bringing it into the 
light of awareness – this will be one of the main purposes of these groups, 
whether they be enlightened businesses, charitable organizations, schools, or 
communities of people living together. Enlightened collectives will fulfill an 
important function in the arising of the new consciousness. Just as egoic 
collectives   pull   you   into   unconsciousness   and   suffering,   the   enlightened 
collective can be a vortex for consciousness that will accelerate the planetary 
shift.
INCONTROVERTIBLE PROOF OF IMMORTALITY
Ego   comes   about   through   a   split   in   the   human   psyche   in   which 
identity separates into two parts that we could call “I” and “me” or “me” and 
“myself.”   Every   ego   is   therefore   schizophrenic,   to   use   the   world   in   its 
popular   meaning   of   split   personality.   You   live   with   a   mental   image   of 
yourself,   a   conceptual   self   that   you   have   a   relationship   with.   Life   itself 
becomes conceptualized and separated from who you are when you speak of 
“my life.” The moment you say or think “my life” and believe in what you 
are saying (rather than it just being a linguistic convention), you have entered 
the realm of delusion. If there is such a thing as “my life,” it follows that I 
and life are two separate things, and so I can also lose my life, my imaginary 
treasured possession. Death becomes a seeming reality and a threat. Words 
and   concepts   split   life   into   separate   segments   that   have   no   reality   in 
themselves.   We   could   even   say   that   the   notion   “my   life”   is   the   original 
delusion of separateness, the source of ego. If I and life are two, if I am 
separate from life, then I am separate form all things, all beings, all people. 
But how could I be separate from life? What “I” could be there apart from 
life, apart from Being? It is utterly impossible. So there is no such thing as 
“my life,” and I don't  have  a life. I  am life. I and life are one. It cannot be 
otherwise. So how could I lose my life? How can I lose something that I 
don't have in the first place? How can I lose something that I Am? It is 
impossible. 
CHAPTER FIVE
THE PAIN­BODY
The   greater   part   of  most   people's  thinking  is  involuntary,  automatic, and 
repetitive.   It   is   no   more  than a  kind of  mental  static  and fulfills no real 
purpose. Strictly speaking, you don't think; Thinking happens to you. The 
statement “I think” implies volition. It implies that you have a say in the 
matter, that there is choice involved on your part. For most people, this is not 
yet the case. “I think” is just as false a statement as “I digest” or “I circulate 
my blood.” Digestion happens, circulation happens, thinking happens.
The voice in the head has a life of its own. Most people are at the 
mercy of that voice; they are possessed by thought, by the mind. And since 
the mind is conditioned by the past, you are then forced to reenact the past 
again and again. The Eastern term for this is karma. When you are identified 
with that voice, you don't know this, of course. If you knew it, you would no 
longer be possessed because you are only truly possessed when you mistake 
the possessing entity for who you are, that is to say, when you become it.
For   thousands   of   years,   humanity   has   been   increasingly   mind­
possessed, failing to recognize the possessing entity as “not self.” Through 
complete identification with the mind, a false sense of self – the ego – came 
into existence. The density of the ego depends on the degree to which you 
the consciousness – are identified with your mind, with thinking. Thinking is 
no more than a tiny aspect of the totality of consciousness, the totality of 
who you are. 
The   degree   of   identification   with   the   mind   differs   from   person   to 
person. Some people enjoy periods of freedom from it, however brief, and 
the peace, joy, and aliveness they experience in those moments make life 
worth   living.   These   are   also   the   moments   when   creativity,   love,   and 
compassion arise. Others are constantly trapped in the egoic state. They are 
alienated   from   themselves,   as   well   as   from   others   and   the   world   around 
them. When you look at them, you may see the tension in their face, perhaps 
the furrowed brow, or the absent or staring expression in their eyes. Most of 
their attention is absorbed by thinking, and so they don't really see you, and 
they are not really listening to you. They are not present in any situation, 
their attention being either in the past or future which, of course, exist only 
in them ind as thought forms. Or they relate to you through some kind of 
role they play and so are not themselves. Most people are alienated from who 
they are, and some are alienated to such a degree that they way they behave 
and interact is recognized as “phony” by almost everyone, except those who 
are equally phony, equally alienated from who they are.
Alienation means you don't feel at ease in any situation, any place, or 
with any person, not even with yourself. You are always trying to get “home' 
but never feel at home. Some of the greatest writers of the twentieth century, 
such as Franz Kafka, Albert Camus, T.S.Eliot, and James Joyce, recognized 
alienation   as   the   universal   dilemma   of   human   existence,   probably   felt   it 
deeply within themselves and so were able to express it brilliantly in their 
works.   They   don't   offer   a   solution.   Their   contribution   is   to   show   us   a 
reflection of the human predicament so that we can see it more clearly. To 
see one's predicament clearly is a first step toward going beyond it.
THE BIRTH OF EMOTION
In addition to the movement of thought, although not entirely separate 
from it, there is another dimension to the ego: emotion. This is not to say 
that all thinking and all emotion are of the ego. The turn into ego only when 
you identify with them and they take you over completely, that is to say, 
when they become “I.”
The physical organism, your body, has its own intelligence, as does the 
organism of every other life­form. And that intelligence reacts to what your 
mind is saying, reacts to your thoughts. So emotion is the body's reaction to 
your   mind.   The   body's   intelligence   is,   of   course,   an   inseparable   part   of 
universal intelligence, one of its countless manifestations. It gives temporary 
cohesion to the atoms and molecules that make up your physical organism. It 
is the organizing principle behind the workings of all the organs of the body, 
the conversion of oxygen and food into energy, the heartbeat and circulation 
of he blood, the immune system that protects the body from invaders, the 
translation of sensory input into nerve impulses that are sent to the brain, 
decoded there, and reassembled into a coherent inner picture of outer reality. 
All these, as well as thousands of others simultaneously occurring functions, 
are coordinated perfectly by that  intelligence. You don't run your body. The 
intelligence   does.   It   also   is   in   charge   of   the   organism's   responses   to   its 
environment. 
This is true for any life­form. It is the same intelligence that brought 
the plant into physical form and then manifests as the flower that comes out 
of the plant, the flower that opens its petals in the morning to receive the 
rays of the sun and closes them at nighttime. It is the same intelligence that 
manifests as Gaia, the complex living being that is planet earth. 
This intelligence gives rise to instinctive reactions of the organism to 
any threat or challenge. It produces responses in animals that appear to be 
akin to human emotions: anger, fear, pleasure. These instinctive responses 
could   be   considered   primordial   forms   of   emotion.   In   certain   situations, 
human beings experience instinctive responses in the same way that animals 
do. In the face of danger, when the survival of the organism is threatened., 
the   heart   beats   faster,   the   muscles   contract,   breathing   becomes   rapid   in 
preparation   for   fight   or   flight.   Primordial   fear.   When   being   cornered,   a 
sudden flare­up of intense energy gives strength to the body that it didn't 
have  before.  Primordial  anger. These instinctive responses appear akin to 
emotions,   but   are   not   emotions   in   the   true   sense   of   the   word.   The 
fundamental difference between an instinctive response and an emotion is 
this: An instinctive response response is the body's direct response to some 
external situation. An emotion, on the other hand, is the body's response to a 
thought.
Indirectly, an emotion can also be a response to an actual situation tor 
event, but it will be a response to the event seen through the filter of a mental 
interpretation,   the   filter   of   thought,   that   is   to   say,   through   the   mental 
concepts of good and bad, like and dislike, me and mine. For example, it is 
likely you won't feel any emotion when you are told that someone's car has 
been   stolen,   but   when   it   is  your  car,   you   will   probably   feel   upset.   It   is 
amazing how much emotion a little mental concept like “my” can generate.
Al though the body is very intelligent, it cannot tell the difference 
between an actual situation and a thought. It reacts to every thought as if it 
were a reality. It doesn't know it is just a thought. To the body, a worrisome, 
fearful thought means “I am in danger,” and it responds accordingly, even 
though you may be lying in a warm and comfortable bed at night. Th heart 
beats faster, muscles contract, breathing becomes rapid. There is a buildup of 
energy,   but   since  the   danger   is  only  a  mental  fiction,  the  energy  has   no 
outlet. Part of it is fed back to the mind and generates even more anxious 
thought.   The   rest   of   the   energy   turns   toxic   and   interferes   with   the 
harmonious functioning of the body.
EMOTIONS AND THE EGO
The ego is not only the unobserved mind, the voice in the head which 
pretends to be you, but also the unobserved emotions that are the body's 
reaction to what the voice in the head is saying.
We have already seen what kind of thinking the egoic voice engages in 
most of the time and the dysfunction inherent in the structure of its thought 
processes,   regardless   of   content.   This   dysfunctional   thinking   is   what   the 
body reacts to with negative emotion.
The voice in the head tells a story that the body believes in and reacts 
to. Those reactions are the emotions. The emotions, in turn, feed energy back 
to the thoughts that created the emotion in the first place. This is the vicious 
circle between unexamined thoughts and emotions, giving rise to emotional 
thinking and emotional story­making.
The emotional component of ego differs from person to person. in 
some   egos,   it   is   greater   than   in   others.   Thoughts   that   trigger   emotional 
responses in the body may sometimes come so fast that before the mind has 
had time to voice them, the body has already responded with an emotion, 
and the emotion has turned into a reaction. Those thoughts exist at a pre­
verbal stage and could be called unspoken, unconscious assumptions. They 
have   their   origin   in   a   person's   past   conditioning,   usually   from   early 
childhood.   “People   cannot   be   trusted”   would   be   an   example   of   such   an 
unconscious assumption in a person whose primordial relationships, that is 
to say, with parents roe siblings, were not supportive and did not inspire 
trust.   Here   are   a   few   more   common   unconscious   assumptions:   “Nobody 
respects and appreciates me. I need to fight to survive. There is never enough 
money. Life always lets you down. I don't deserve abundance. I don't deserve 
love.” Unconscious assumptions create emotions in the body which in turn 
generate mind activity and/or instant reactions. In this way, they create your 
personal reality. 
The voice of the ego continuously disrupts the body's natural state of 
well­being. Almost every human body is under a great deal of strain and 
stress, not because it is threatened by some external factor but from within 
the mind. The body has an ego attached to it, and it cannot but respond to all 
the dysfunctional thought patterns that make up the ego. Thus, a stream of 
negative   emotion   accompanies   the   stream   of   incessant   and   compulsive 
thinking.
What is a negative emotion? An emotion that is toxic to the body and 
interferes with its balance and harmonious functioning. Fear, anxiety, anger, 
bearing   a   grudge,   sadness,   hatred  or   intense   dislike,   jealousy,   envy  –   all 
disrupt   the   energy   flow   through   the   body,   affect   the   heart,   the   immune 
system,   digestion,   production   of   hormones,   and   so   on.   Even   mainstream 
medicine, although it knows very little about how the ego operates yet is 
beginning to recognize the connection between negative emotional states and 
physical disease. An emotion that does harm to the body also infects the 
people you come into contact with and indirectly, though a process of chain 
reaction, countless others you never meet. There is a generic term for all 
negative emotions: unhappiness.
Do positive emotions then have the opposite effect on the physical 
body? Do they strengthen the immune system, invigorate and heal the body? 
They do, indeed, but we need to differentiate between positive emotions that 
are ego­generated and deeper emotions that emanate from your natural state 
of connectedness with Being. 
Positive   emotions   generated   by   the   ego   already   contain   within 
themselves their opposite into which they can quickly turn. Here are some 
examples. What the ego calls love is possessiveness and addictive clinging 
that  can  turn  into  hate  within a second. Anticipation about an upcoming 
event, which is the ego's overvaluation of future, easily turns into its opposite 
– letdown or disappointment – when the event is over or doesn't fulfill the 
ego's expectations. Praise and recognition make you feel alive and happy one 
day; being criticized or ignored make you dejected and unhappy the next. 
The pleasure of a wild party turns into bleakness and a hangover the next 
morning. There is no good without bad, no high without low.
Ego­generated   emotions   are   derived   from   the   mind's   identification 
with external factors which are of course, all unstable and liable to change at 
any moment. The deeper emotions are not really emotions at all but states of 
Being. Emotions exist within the realm of opposites. States of Being can be 
obscured, but they have no opposite. They emanate from within you as the 
love, joy, and peace that are aspects of your true nature. 
THE DUCK WITH A HUMAN MIND
In The Power of Now, I mentioned my observation that after two ducks 
get into a fight, which never lasts long, they will separate and float off in 
opposite directions. Then each duck will flap its wings vigorously a few 
times; thus releasing the surplus energy that built up during the fight. After 
they   flap   their   wings,   they   float   on   peacefully,   as   if   nothing   had   ever 
happened.
 
If   the   duck   had   a   human   mind,   it   would   keep   the   fight   alive   by 
thinking, by story­making. This would probably be the duck's story: “I don't 
believe what he just did. He came to within five inches of me. He thinks he 
owns this pond. He has no consideration for my private space. I'll never trust 
him again. Next time he'll try something else just to annoy me. I'm sure he's 
plotting something already. But I'm not going to stand for this. I'll teach him 
a   lesson   he   won't   forget.”   And   on   and   on   the   mind   spins   its   tales,   still 
thinking and talking about it days, months, or years later. As far as the body 
is   concerned,   the   fight   is   still   continuing,  and  the  energy  it   generates  in 
response   to   all   those   thoughts   is   emotion,   which   in   turn   generates   more 
thinking. This becomes the emotional thinking of the ego. you can see how 
problematic the duck's life would become if it had a human mind. But this is 
how most humans live all the time.
No situation or event is ever really finished. The mind and the mind­
made “me and my story” keep it going. 
We   are   a   species   that   ahas   lost   its   way.   everything   natural,   every 
flower or tree, and every animal have important lessons to teach us if we 
would only stop, look and listen. Our duck's lesson is this: Flap your wings – 
which translates as “let go of the story” ­ and return to the only place of 
power: the present moment.
CARRYING THE PAST
The inability or rather unwillingness of the human mind to let go of 
the past is beautifully illustrated in the story of two Zen monks, Tanzan and 
Ekido, who were walking along a country road that had become extremely 
muddy after heavy rains. Near a village, they came upon a young woman 
who was trying to cross the road, but the mud was so deep it would have 
ruined the silk kimono she was wearing. Tanzan at once picked her up and 
carried her to the other side. 
The   monks   walked   on   in   silence.   Five   hours   later,   as   they   were 
approaching the lodging temple, Ekido couldn't restrain himself any longer. 
“Why did you carry that girl across the road?” he asked. “We monks are not 
supposed to do things like that.”
“I put the girl down hours ago,” said Tanzan. “Are you still carrying 
her?”
Now   imagine   what   life   would   be   like   for   someone   who   lived   like 
Ekido   all   the  time,   unable  or  unwilling to let  go internally of  situations, 
accumulating more and more “stuff' inside, and you get a sense of what life 
is like for the majority of people on our planet. What a heavy burden of past 
they carry around with them in their minds.
The past lives in you as memories, but memories in themselves are not 
a problem. in fact, it is through memory that we learn from the past and from 
past mistakes. It is only when memories, that is to say, thoughts about the 
past, take you over completely that they turn into a burden, turn problematic, 
and become part of your sense of self. Your personality, which is conditioned 
by the past, then becomes your prison. Your memories are invested with a 
sense of self, and your story becomes who you perceive yourself to be. This 
“little me” is  an  illusion  that obscures your true identity as timeless and 
formless Presence.
Your story, however, consists not only of mental but also of emotional 
memory – old emotion that is being revived continuously. As in the case of 
the monk who carried the burden of his resentment for five hours by feeding 
it   with   his   thoughts,   most   people   carry   a   large   amount   of   unnecessary 
baggage,   both   mental   and   emotional,   throughout   their   lives.   They   limit 
themselves   through   grievances,   regret,   hostility,   guilt.   Their   emotional 
thinking   has   become   their   self,  and   so   they   hang  on   to  the  old   emotion 
because it strengthens their identity.
Because   of   the  human  tendency   to  perpetuate   old   emotion,   almost 
everyone carries in his or her energy filed an accumulation of old emotional 
pain, which I call “the pain­body.”
We can, however, stop adding to the pin­body that we already have. 
We   can   learn   to   break   the   habit   of   accumulating   and   perpetuating   old 
emotion by flapping our wings, metaphorically speaking, and refrain from 
mentally dwelling on the past, regardless of whether something happened 
yesterday or thirty years ago. We can learn not to keep situations or events 
alive in our minds, but to return our attention continuously to the pristine, 
timeless present moment rather than be caught up in mental movie­making. 
Our very Presence then becomes our identity, rather than our thoughts and 
emotions.
Nothing ever happened in the past that can prevent you from being 
present now; and if the past cannot prevent you from being present now, 
what power does it have?
INDIVIDUAL AND COLLECTIVE
Any negative emotion that is not fully faced and seen for what it is in 
the moment it arises does not completely dissolve. It leaves behind a remnant 
of pain.
Children in particular find strong negative emotions too overwhelming 
to   cope   with   and   tend   to   try not  to feel them. In the absence of  a fully 
conscious   adult   who   guides   them   with   love   and   compassionate 
understanding   into   facing   the   emotion   directly,   choosing   not   to   feel   it   is 
indeed the only option for the child at that time. Unfortunately, that early 
defense  mechanism  usually   remains  in  place  when  the  child becomes  an 
adult.   The   emotion   still   lives   in   him   or   her   unrecognized   and   manifests 
indirectly, for example, as anxiety, anger, outbursts of violence, a mood, or 
even as a physical illness. In some cases, it interferes with or sabotages every 
intimate relationship. Most psychotherapists have met patients who claimed 
initially to have had a totally happy childhood, and later the opposite turned 
out to be the case. Those may be the more extreme cases, but nobody can go 
through childhood without suffering emotional pain. Even if both of your 
parents   were   enlightened,   you   would   still   find   yourself   growing   up   in   a 
largely unconscious world. 
The remnants of pain left behind by every strong negative emotion 
that is not fully faced, accepted, and then let go of join together to form an 
energy filed that lives in the very cells of your body. It consists not just of 
childhood   pain,   but   also   painful   emotions   that   were   added   to   it   later   in 
adolescence and during your adult life, much of it created by the voice of the 
ego. It is the emotional pain that is your unavoidable companion when a 
false sense of self is the basis of your life.
This energy field of old but still very­much­alive emotion that lives in 
almost every human being is the pain­body.
The   pain­body,   however,   is   not   just   individual   in   nature.   It   also 
partakes of the pain suffered by countless humans throughout the history of 
humanity, which is a history of continuous tribal warfare, of enslavement, 
pillage, rape, torture, and other forms of violence. This pain still lives in the 
collective psyche of humanity and is being added to on a daily basis, as you 
can verify when you watch the news tonight or look at the drama in people's 
relationships.   The   collective   pain­body   is   probably   encoded   within   every 
human's DNA, although we haven't discovered it there yet.
Every   newborn   who   comes   into   this   world   already   carries   an 
emotional pain­body. In some it is heavier, more dense than in others. Some 
babies are quite happy most of the time. Others seem to carry an enormous 
amount of unhappiness within them. It is true that some babies cry a great 
deal because they are not given enough love and attention, but others cry for 
no apparent reason, almost as if they were trying to make everyone around 
them as unhappy as they are – and often they succeed. They have come into 
this   world   with   a   heavy   share   of   human   pain.   Other   babies   may   cry 
frequently   because   they   can   sense   the   emanation   of   their   mother's   and 
father's negative emotion, and it causes them pain and also causes their pain­
body to grow already by absorbing energy from the parents' pain­bodies. 
Whatever the case may be, as the baby's physical body grows, so does the 
pain­body.
An infant with only a light pain­body is not necessarily going to be a 
spiritually “more advanced” man or woman than somebody with a dense 
one. In fact, the opposite is often the case. People with heavy pain­bodies 
usually have a better chance to awaken spiritually than those with a relatively 
light one. Whereas some of them do remain trapped in their heavy pain­
bodies,   many   others   reach   a   point   where   they   cannot   live   with   their 
unhappiness any longer, and so their motivation to awaken becomes strong. 
Why is the suffering body of Christ, his face distorted in agony and 
his body bleeding form countless wounds, such a significant image in the 
collective   consciousness   of   humanity?   Millions   of   people,   particularly   in 
medieval   times,   would   not   have   related   to   it   as   deeply   as   they   did   if 
something   within   themselves   had   not   resonated   with   it,   if   they   had   not 
unconsciously recognized it as an outer representation of their own inner 
reality – the pain­body. They were not yet conscious enough to recognize it 
directly within themselves, but it was the beginning of their becoming aware 
of it. Christ can be seen as the archetypal human, embodying both the pain 
and the possibility of transcendence.
HOW THE PAIN­BODY RENEWS ITSELF
The pain­body is a semi­autonomous energy form that lives within 
most human beings, an entity made up of emotion. It has its own primitive 
intelligence,   not   unlike   a   cunning   animal,   and   its   intelligence   is   directed 
primarily at survival.   Like all life­forms, it periodically needs to feed – to 
take in new energy – and the food it requires to replenish itself consists of 
energy that is compatible with its own, which is to say, energy that vibrates 
at a similar frequency. Any emotionally painful experience can be used as 
food by the pain­body. That's why it thrives on negative thinking as well as 
drama in relationships. The pain­body is an addiction to unhappiness.
It may be shocking when you realize for the first time that there is 
something   within   you   that   periodically   seeks   emotional   negativity,   seeks 
unhappiness. You need even more awareness to see it in yourself than to 
recognize it in another person. Once the unhappiness has taken you over, not 
only   do   you   not   want   an   end to it, but  you want  to make others  just  as 
miserable as you are in order to feed on their negative emotional reactions.
In   most   people,   the   pain­body   has   a   dormant   and   an   active   stage. 
When it is dormant, you easily forget that you carry a heavy dark cloud or a 
dormant volcano inside you, depending on the energy field of your particular 
pain­body. How long it remains dormant varies from person to person: A few 
weeks is the most common, but it can be a few days or months. In rare cases 
the pain­body can lie in hibernation for years before it gets triggered by some 
event.

HOW THE PAIN­BODY FEEDS ON YOUR THOUGHTS
The pain­body awakens from its dormancy when it gets hungry, when 
it is time to replenish itself. Alternatively, it may get triggered by an event at 
any time. The pain­body that is ready to feed can use the most insignificant 
event as a trigger, something somebody says or does, or even a thought. If 
you live alone or there is nobody around at the time, the pain­body will feed 
on your thoughts. Suddenly, your thinking becomes deeply negative. You 
were most likely unaware that just prior to the influx of negative thinking a 
wave of emotion invaded your mind – as a dark and heavy mood, as anxiety 
or fiery anger. All thought is energy and the pain­body is now feeding on the 
energy of your thoughts. But it cannot feed on any thought. You don't need to 
be   particularly   sensitive   to   notice   that   a   positive   thought   has   a   totally 
different   feeling­tone   than   a   negative   one.   It   is   the   same   energy,   but   it 
vibrates at a different frequency. A happy, positive thought is indigestible to 
the   pain­body.   It   can   only   feed   on   negative   thoughts   because   only   those 
thoughts are compatible with its own energy field. 
All things are vibrating energy fields in ceaseless motion. The chair 
you   sit   on,   the   book   you   are   holding   in   your   hands   appear   solid   and 
motionless only because that is how your senses perceive their vibrational 
frequency, that is to say, the incessant movement of the molecules, atoms, 
electrons and subatomic particles that together create what you perceive as a 
chair,   a   book,   a  tree,   or   a  body. What  we perceive  as physical  matter   is 
energy   vibrating   (moving)   at   a   particular   range   of   frequencies.   Thoughts 
consist of the same energy vibrating at a higher frequency than matter, which 
is why they cannot be seen or touched. Thoughts have their own range of 
frequencies,   which     negative   thoughts   at   the   lower   end   of   the   scale   and 
positive thoughts at the higher. The vibrational frequency of the pain­body 
resonates with that of negative thoughts, which is why only those thoughts 
can feed the pain­body.
The usual pattern of thought creating emotion is reversed in the case 
of the pain­body, at least initially. Emotion from the pain­body quickly gains 
control of your thinking, and once your mind has been taken over by the 
pain­body, your thinking becomes negative. The voice in your head will be 
telling sad, anxious, or angry stories about yourself or your life, about other 
people, about past, future, or imaginary events. The voice will be blaming, 
accusing,   complaining,   imagining.   And   you   are   totally   identified   with 
whatever the voice says, believe all its distorted thoughts. At that point, the 
addiction to unhappiness has set in.
It is not so much that you cannot stop your train of negative thoughts, 
but that you don't want to. This is because the pain­body at that time is living 
through you, pretending to be you. And to the pain­body, pain is pleasure. It 
eagerly devours every negative thought. In fact, the usual voice in your head 
has now become the voice of the pain­body. It has taken over the internal 
dialogue. A vicious circle becomes established between the pain­body and 
your thinking. Every thought feeds the pain­body and in turn the pain­body 
generates more thoughts. At some point, after a few hours or even a few 
days, it has replenished itself and returns to its dormant stage, leaving behind 
a depleted organism and a body that is much more susceptible to illness. If 
that sounds to you like a psychic parasite, you are right. That's exactly what 
it is.
HOW THE PAIN­BODY FEEDS ON DRAMA
If there are other people around, preferably your partner or a close 
family member, the pain­body will attempt to provoke them – push their 
buttons, as the expression goes ­ so it can feed on the ensuing drama. Pain­
bodies love intimate relationships and families because that is where they get 
most   of   heir   food.   It   is   hard   to   resist   another   person's   pain­body   that   is 
determined to draw you into a reaction. Instinctively it knows your weakest, 
most vulnerable points. If it doesn't succeed the first time, it will try again 
and again. It is raw emotion looking for more emotion. The other person's 
pain­body   wants   to   awaken   yours   so   that   both   pain­bodies   can   mutually 
energize each other.
Many   relationships   go   through   violent   and   destructive   pain­body 
episodes   at   regular  intervals. It  is  almost  unbearably painful for a  young 
child to have to witness the emotional violence of their parents' pain­bodies, 
and   yet   that   is   the   fate   of   millions   of   children   all   over   the   world,   the 
nightmare  of   their   daily   existence. That  is  also one of  the main ways in 
which   the   human   pain­body   is   passed   on   from   generation   to   generation. 
After each episode, the partners make up, and there is an interval of relative 
peace, to the limited extent that the ego allows it.
Excessive consumption of alcohol will often activate the pain­body, 
particularly   in   men,   but   also   in   some   women.   When   a   person   becomes 
drunk, he goes through a complete personality change as the pain­body takes 
him   over.   A   deeply   unconscious   person   whose   pain­body   habitually 
replenishes itself through physical violence often directs it toward his spouse 
or children. When he becomes sober, he is truly sorry and may say he will 
never do this again, and he means it. The person who is talking and making 
promises, however, is not the entity that commits the violence, and so you 
can be sure that it will happen again and again unless he becomes present, 
recognizes the pain­body within himself, and thus disidentifies form it. In 
some cases, counseling can help him do that. 
Most pain­bodies want to both inflict and suffer pain, but some are 
predominantly  either  perpetrators or victims. In either case, they feed on 
violence, whether emotional or physical. Some couples who may think they 
have “fallen in love” are actually feeling drawn to each other because their 
respective   pain­bodies   complement   each   other.   Sometimes   the   roles   of 
perpetrator  and   victim  are  already clearly  prescribed  the  time  they  meet. 
Some marriages that are thought to be made in heaven are actually made in 
hell.
If you have ever lived with a cat, you will know that even when the cat 
seems to be asleep, it still knows what is going on, because at the slightest 
unusual noise, its ears will move toward it, and its eyes may open slightly. 
Dormant pain­bodies are the same. On some level, they are still awake, ready 
to jump into action when an appropriate trigger presents itself. 
In intimate relationships, pain­bodies are often clever enough to lie 
low   until   you   start   living   together   and   preferably   have   signed   a   contract 
committing yourself to be with this person for the rest of your life. You don't 
just marry your wife or husband, you also marry her or his pain­body – and 
your spouse marries yours. It can be quite a shock when, perhaps not long 
after moving in together after the honey moon, you find suddenly one day 
there is a complete personality change in your partner. Her voice becomes 
harsh or shrill as she accuses you, blames you, or shouts at you, mostly likely 
over a relatively trivial matter. Or she becomes totally withdrawn. “What's 
wrong?” you ask. “Nothing is wrong,” she says. But the intensely hostile 
energy she emanates is saying, “Everything is wrong.” When you look into 
her   eyes,   there   is   no   light   in  them   anymore;   it   is   as   if  a  heavy  veil   has 
descended, and the being you know and love which before was able to shine 
through her ego, is now totally obscured. A compete stranger seems to be 
looking back at you, and in her eyes there is hatred, hostility, bitterness, or 
anger.   When   she   speaks   to   you,   it   is   not   your   spouse   or   partner   who   is 
speaking but the pain­body speaking through them. Whatever she is saying 
is the pain­body's version of reality, a reality completely distorted by fear, 
hostility, anger, and a desire to inflict and receive more pain.
At this point you may wonder whether this is your partner's real face 
that you had never seen before and whether you made a dreadful mistake in 
choosing this person. It is, of course, not the real face, just the pain­body that 
temporarily has taken possession. It would be hard to find a partner who 
doesn't carry a pain­body; but it would perhaps be wise to choose someone 
whose pain­body is not excessively dense. 
DENSE PAIN­BODIES
Some   people   carry   dense   pain­bodies   that   are   never   completely 
dormant. They may be smiling and making polite conversation, but you do 
not need to be psychic to sense that seething ball of unhappy emotion in 
them just underneath the surface, waiting for the next event to react to, the 
next person to blame or confront, the next thing to be unhappy about.. Their 
pain­bodies   can   never   get   enough,   are   always   hungry.   They   magnify   the 
ego's need for enemies.
Through their reactivity, relatively insignificant matters are blown up 
out of all proportion as they try to pull other people into their drama by 
getting   them   to   react.   Some   get   involved   in   protracted   and   ultimately 
pointless battles or court cases with organizations or individuals. Others are 
consumed by obsessive hatred toward an ex­spouse or partner. Unaware of 
the pain they carry inside, by their reaction, they project the pain into events 
and situations. Due to a complete lack of self­awareness, they cannot tell the 
difference between an event and their reaction to the event. To them, the 
unhappiness and even the pain itself is out there in the event or situation. 
Being unconscious of their inner state, they don't even know that they are 
deeply unhappy, that they are suffering.
Sometimes   people   with   such   dense   pain­bodies   become   activists 
fighting   for   a   cause.   The   cause   may   indeed   be   worthy,   and   they   are 
sometimes successful at first in getting things done; however the negative 
energy that flows into what they say and do and their unconscious need for 
enemies and conflict tend to generate increasing opposition to their cause. 
Usually they also end up creating enemies within their own organization, 
because wherever they go, they find reasons for feeling bad, and so their 
pain­body continues to find exactly what it is looking for. 
ENTERTAINMENT, THE MEDIA, AND THE PAIN­BODY
If you were not familiar with our contemporary civilization, if you had 
come here from another age or another planet, one of the things that would 
amaze you is that millions of people love and pay money to watch humans 
kill and inflict pain on each other and call it “entertainment.”
Why do violent films attract such large audiences? There is an entire 
industry, a large part of which fuels the human addiction to unhappiness. 
People obviously watch those films because they want to feel bad. What is it 
in humans that loves to feel bad and calls it good? The pain­body, of course. 
A large part of the entertainment industry caters to it. So, in addition to 
reactivity, negative thinking, and personal drama, the pain­body also renews 
itself vicariously through the cinema and television screen. Pain­bodies write 
and produce these films, and pain­bodies pay to watch them. 
Is it always “wrong” to show and watch violence on television and the 
cinema screen? Does all such violence cater to the pain­body? At the current 
evolutionary stage of humanity, violence is still not only all­pervasive but 
even   on   the   increase,   as   the   old   egoic   consciousness,   amplified   by   the 
collective pain­body, intensifies prior to its inevitable demise. If films show 
violence in its wider context, if they show its origin and its consequences, 
show what it does to the victim as well as the perpetrator, show the collective 
unconsciousness   that   lies   behind   it   and   is   passed   on   from   generation   to 
generation (the anger and hatred that lives in humans as the pain­body), then 
those films can fulfill a vital function in the awakening of humanity. They 
can act as a mirror in which humanity sees its own insanity. That in you 
which recognizes madness as madness (even if it is your own) is sanity, is 
the arising awareness, is the end of insanity.
Such films do exist and they do not fuel the pain­body. Some of the 
best   antiwar   films   are   films   that   show   the   reality   of   war   rather   than   a 
glamorized version of it. The pain­body can only feed on films in which 
violence is portrayed as normal or even desirable human behavior, or that 
glorify violence with the sole purpose of generating negative emotion in the 
viewer and so become a “fix” for the pain­addicted pain­body.
The popular tabloid press does not primarily sell news but negative 
emotion   –   food   for   the   pain­body.   “Outrage”   screams   the   three­inch 
headline, or “Bastards.” The British tabloid press excels at this. They know 
that negative emotion sells far more papers than news does.
There is a tendency in the news media in general, including television, 
to   thrive   on   negative   news.   The   worse   things   get,   the   more   excited   the 
presenters become, and often the negative excitement is generated by the 
media itself. Pain­bodies just love it. 
THE COLLECTIVE FEMALE PAIN­BODY
The collective dimension of the pain­body has different strands in it. 
Tribes, nations, races, all have their own collective pain—body, some heavier 
than others, and most members of that tribe, nation or race have a share in it 
to a greater or lesser degree.
Almost every woman has her share in the collective female pain­body, 
which   tends   to   become   activated   particularly   just   prior   to   the   time   of 
menstruation. At that time many women become overwhelmed by intense 
negative emotion.
The suppression of the feminine principle especially over the past two 
thousand   years   has   enabled   the   ego   to   gain   absolute   supremacy   in   the 
collective human psyche. Although women have egos, of course, the ego can 
take root and grow more easily in the male form than in the female. this is 
because women are less mind­identified than men. They are more in touch 
with the inner body and the intelligence of the organism where the intuitive 
faculties  originate.   The  female  form   is  less  rigidly  encapsulated than the 
male, has greater openness and sensitivity toward other life­forms, and is 
more attuned to the natural world. 
If   the   balance   between   male   and   female   energies   had   not   been 
destroyed on our plant, the ego's growth would have been greatly curtailed. 
We   would   not   have   declared   war   on   nature,   and   we   would   not   be   so 
completely alienated from our Being.
Nobody knows the exact figure because records were not kept, but it 
sees certain that during a three­hundred­year period between three and five 
million   women   were   tortured   and   killed   by   the   “Holy   Inquisition,   “   an 
institution founded by the Roman Catholic Church to suppress heresy. This 
sure  ranks  together   with   the Holocaust   as  one of   the  darkest  chapters  in 
human history. It was enough for a woman to show a love for animals, walk 
alone in the fields or woods, or gather medicinal plants to be branded a 
witch,   then     tortured   and   burned   at   the   stake.   The   sacred   feminine   was 
declared demonic, and an entire dimension largely disappeared form human 
experience. Other cultures and religions, such as Judaism, Islam, and even 
Buddhism, also suppressed the female dimension, although in a less violent 
way. Women's status was reduced to being child bearers and men's property. 
Males who denied the feminine even within themselves where now running 
the world, a world that was totally out of balance. The rest is history or rather 
a case history of insanity. 
 
Who was responsible for this fear of the feminine that could only be 
described as acute collective paranoia? We could say: Of course, men were 
responsible. But then why in many ancient pre­Christian civilizations such as 
the Sumerian, Egyptian, and Celtic were women respected and the feminine 
principle not feared but revered? What is it that suddenly made men feel 
threatened by the female? The evolving ego in them. It knew it could gain 
full control of our planet only through the male form, and to do so, it had to 
render the female powerless. 
In time, the ego also took over most women, although it could never 
become as deeply entrenched in them as in men. 
We now have a situation in which the suppression of the feminine has 
become internalized, even in most women. The sacred feminine, because it is 
suppressed, is felt by many women as emotional pain. In fact, it has become 
part   of   their   pain­body,   together   with   the   accumulated   pain   suffered   by 
women over millennia through childbirth, rape, slavery, torture and violent 
death.
But  things  are  changing rapidly now. With many people becoming 
more conscious, the ego is losing its hold on the human mind. Because the 
ego was never as deeply rooted in woman, it is losing its hold on women 
more quickly than on men.
NATIONAL AND RACIAL PAIN­BODIES
Certain   countries   in   which   many   acts   of   collective   violence   were 
suffered or perpetrated have a heavier collective pain­body than others. This 
is why older nations tend to have stronger pain­bodies. It is also why younger 
countries, such as Canada or Australia, and those that have remained more 
sheltered from the surrounding madness, such as Switzerland, tend to have 
lighter collective pain­bodies. Of course, in those countries, people still have 
their personal pain­body to deal with. If you are sensitive enough, you can 
feel a heaviness in the energy field of certain countries as soon as you step 
off the plane. In other countries, one can sense an energy field of latent 
violence just underneath the surface of everyday life. In some nations, for 
example,   in   the   Middle   East,   the   collective   pain­body   is   so   acute   that   a 
significant part of the population finds itself forced to act it out in an endless 
and insane cycle of perpetration and retribution through which the pain­body 
renews itself continuously.
In countries where the pain­body is heavy but no longer acute, there 
has   been   a   tendency   for   people   to   try   and   desensitize   themselves   to   the 
collective  emotional   pain:   in Germany and Japan through  work, in  some 
other countries through widespread indulgence in alcohol (which, however, 
can also have the opposite effect of stimulating the pain­body, particularly if 
consumed in excess). China's heavy pain­body is to some extent mitigated by 
the widespread practice of t'ai chi, which amazingly was not declared illegal 
by the Communist government that otherwise feels threatened by anything it 
cannot control. Every day in the streets and city parks, millions practice this 
movement   meditation   that   stills   the   mind.   This   makes   a   considerable 
difference   to   the   collective   energy   field   and   goes   some   way   toward 
diminishing the pain­body by reducing thinking and generating Presence. 
Spiritual   practices   that   involve   the   physical   body,   such   as   tai   chi, 
qigong,   and   yoga,   are   also   increasingly   being   embraced   in   the   Western 
world. These practices do not create a separation between body and spirit 
and are helpful in weakening the pain­body. They will play an important role 
in the global awakening.
The collective racial pain­body is pronounced in Jewish people, who 
have suffered persecution over many centuries. Not surprisingly, it is strong 
as well in Native Americans, whose numbers were decimated and whose 
culture all but destroyed by the European settlers. In Black Americans too 
the   collective   pain­body   is   pronounced.   Their   ancestors   were   violently 
uprooted, beaten into submission, and sold into slavery. The foundation of 
American economic prosperity rested on the labor of four to five million 
black slaves. In fact, the suffering inflicted on Native and Black Americans 
has not remained confined to those two races, but has become part of the 
collective American pain­body. It is always the case that both victim and 
perpetrator suffer the consequences of any acts of violence, oppression, or 
brutality. For what you do to others, you do to yourself.
It doesn't really matter what proportion of your pain­body belongs to 
your nation or race and what proportion is personal. In either case, you can 
only go beyond it by taking responsibility for you inner state now. Even if 
blame  seems  more than justified, as long as you blame others, you keep 
feeding the pain­body with your thoughts and remain trapped in your ego. 
There is only one perpetrator of evil on the planet: human unconsciousness. 
That realization is true forgiveness. With forgiveness, your victim identity 
dissolves, and your true power emerges – the power of Presence. Instead of 
blaming the darkness, you bring in the light.
CHAPTER SIX
BREAKING FREE
The   beginning   of   freedom   from   the   pain­body   lies   first   of   all   in   the 
realization that you have a pain­body. Then, more important, in your ability 
to stay present enough, alert enough, to notice the pan­body in yourself as a 
heavy   influx   of   negative   emotion   when   it   becomes   active.   When   it   is 
recognized,  it   can  no   longer pretend to be you and live and renew itself 
through you.
It is your conscious Presence that breaks the identification with the 
pain­body.  When  you  don't   identify with it, the pain­body can no longer 
control your thinking and so cannot renew itself anymore by feeding on your 
thoughts. The pain­body in most cases does not dissolve immediately, but 
once you have severed the link between it and your thinking, the pain­body 
begins to lose energy. Your thinking ceases to be clouded by emotion; your 
present perceptions are no longer distorted by the past. The energy that was 
trapped   in   the   pain­body   then   changes   into   vibrational   frequency   and   is 
transmuted   into   Presence.   In   this   way,   the   pain­body   becomes   fuel   for 
consciousness. This is why many of the wisest, most enlightened men and 
women on our planet once had a heavy pain­body.
Regardless of what you say or do or what face you show to the world, 
your   mental­emotional   state   cannot   be   concealed.   Every   human   being 
emanates an energy field that corresponds to his or her inner state, and most 
people can sense it, although they may feel someone else's energy emanation 
only subliminally. That is to say, they don't know that they sense it, yet it 
determines to a large extent how they feel about and react to that person. 
Some people are most clearly aware of it when they first meet someone, even 
before any words are exchanged. A little later, however, words take over the 
relationship and with words come the roles that most people play. Attention 
then moves to the realm of mind, and the ability to sense the other person's 
energy field becomes greatly diminished. Nevertheless, it is still felt on an 
unconscious level.
When you realize that pain­bodies unconsciously seek more pain, that 
is to say that they want something bad to happen, you will understand that 
many traffic accidents are caused by drivers whose pain­bodies are active at 
the time. When two drivers with active pain­bodies arrive at an intersection 
at the same time, the likelihood of an accident is many times greater than 
under normal circumstances. Unconsciously they both want the accident to 
happen. The role of pain­bodies in traffic accidents is most obvious in the 
phenomenon   called   “road   rage,”   when   drivers   become   physically   violent 
often  over a  trivial  matter  such as someone in front of them driving too 
slowly.
Man   acts   of   violence   are   committed   by   “normal”   people   who 
temporarily turn into maniacs. All over the world at court proceedings you 
hear   the   defense   lawyers   say,   “This   is   totally   out   of   character,”   and   the 
accused, “I don't know what came over me.” To my knowledge so far, no 
defense lawyer has said to the judge – although the day may not be far off ­ 
“This   is   a   case   of   diminished   responsibility.   My   client's   pain­body   was 
activated, and he did not know what he was doing. In fact, he didn't do it. His 
pain­body did.”
Does this mean that people are not responsible for what they do when 
possessed by the pain­body? My answer is: How can they be? How can you 
be responsible when you are unconscious, when you don't know what you 
are   doing?   However,   in   the   greater   scheme   of   things,   human   beings   are 
meant to evolve into conscious beings, and those who don't will suffer the 
consequences of their unconsciousness. They are out of alignment with the 
evolutionary impulse of the universe.
And even that is only relatively true. From a higher perspective, it is 
not possible to be out of alignment with the evolution of the universe, and 
even human unconsciousness and the suffering it generates is part of that 
evolution. When you can't stand the endless cycle of suffering anymore, you 
being to awaken. So the pain­body too has its necessary place in the larger 
picture.
PRESENCE
A woman in her thirties came to see me. As she greeted me, I could sense 
the pain behind her polite and superficial smile. She started telling me her 
story, and within one second her smile changed into a grimace of pain. Then, 
she began  to sob uncontrollably. She said she felt lonely and unfulfilled. 
There was much anger and sadness. As a child she had been abused by a 
physically violent father. I saw quickly that her pain was not caused by her 
present life circumstances but by an extraordinarily heavy pain­body. Her 
pain­body had become the filter through which she viewed her life situation. 
She was not yet able to see the link between the emotional pain and her 
thoughts, being completely identified with both. She could not yet see that 
she was feeding the pain­body with her thoughts. In other words, she lived 
with the burden of a deeply unhappy self. At some level, however, she must 
have realized that her pain originated within herself, that she was a burden to 
herself. She was ready to awaken, and this is why she had come. 
I directed the focus of her attention to what she was feeling inside her 
body and asked her to sense the emotion directly, instead of through the filter 
of   her   unhappy   thoughts,   her   unhappy   story.   She   said   she   had   come 
expecting   me   to   show   her   the   way   out   of   her   unhappiness,   not   into   it. 
Reluctantly,   however,   she   did what  I asked her to do. Tears were rolling 
down her face, her whole body was shaking. “At this moment, this is what 
you feel.” I said. “There is nothing you can do about the fact that  at this 
moment  this is what you feel. Now, instead of wanting this moment to be 
different from the way it is, which adds more pain to the pain that is already 
there, is it possible for you to completely accept that this is what you feel 
right now?”
She was quiet for a moment. Suddenly she looked impatient, as if she 
was about to get up, and said angrily, “No, I don't want to accept this.” “Who 
is speaking?” I asked her. “You or the unhappiness in you? Can you see that 
your unhappiness about being unhappy is just another layer of unhappiness?” 
She became quiet again. “I am not asking you to do anything. All I'm asking 
is that you find out whether it is possible for you to allow those feelings to be 
there. In other words, and this may sound strange, if you don't mind being 
unhappy, what happens to the unhappiness? Don't you want to find out?”
She looked puzzled briefly, and after a minute or so of sitting silently, 
I suddenly noticed a significant shift in her energy field. She said, “This is 
weird. I 'm still unhappy, but now there is space around it. It seems to matter 
less.” This was the first time I heard somebody put it like that: There is space 
around my unhappiness. That space, of course, comes when there is inner 
acceptance of whatever you are experiencing in the present moment.
I didn't say much else, allowing her to be with the experience. Later 
she came to understand that the moment she stopped identifying with the 
feeling, the old painful emotion that lived in her, the moment she put her 
attention on it directly without trying to resist it, it could no longer control 
her   thinking   and   so  become  mixed  up with a  mentally constructed  story 
called “The Unhappy Me.” Another dimension had come into her life that 
transcended her personal past – the dimension of Presence. Since you cannot 
be unhappy without an unhappy story, this was the end of her unhappiness. It 
was also the beginning of the end of her pain­body. Emotion in itself is not 
unhappiness. Only emotion plus an unhappy story is unhappiness.
When our session came to an end, it was fulfilling to know that I had 
just witnessed  the  arising of Presence in another human being. The very 
reason   for   our   existence   in   human   form   is   to   bring   that   dimension   of 
consciousness into this world. I had also witnessed a diminishment of the 
pain­body,   not   through   fighting   it   but   through   bringing   th   light   of 
consciousness to it.
A few minutes after my visitor left, a friend arrived to drop something 
off. As soon as she came into the room she said, “What happened here? The 
energy feels heavy and murky. It almost makes me feel sick. You need to 
open the windows, burn some incense.” I explained that I had just witnessed 
a major release in someone with a very dense pain­body and that what she 
felt must be some of the energy that was released during our session. My 
friend, however, didn't want to stay and listen. She wanted to get away as 
soon as possible.
I opened the windows and went out to have dinner at a small Indian 
restaurant nearby. What happened there was a clear, further confirmation of 
what I already know: That on some level, all seemingly individual human 
pan­bodies are connected. Although the form this particular confirmation 
took did come as a shock.
THE RETURN OF THE PAIN­BODY
I  sat down  at  a  table and ordered a meal. There were a few other 
guests. At a nearby table, there was a middle­aged man in a wheelchair who 
was just finishing his meal. He glanced at me once, briefly but intensely. A 
few minutes passed. Suddenly he became restless, agitated, his body began 
twitching. The waiter came to take his plate. The man started arguing with 
him. “The food was no good. It was dreadful.” “Then why did you eat it?” 
asked the waiter. And that really set him off. He started shouting, became 
abusive. Vile words were coming out of his mouth; intense, violent hatred 
filled the room. One could feel that energy entering the cells of one's body 
looking   for   something   to   latch  on  to.  Now  he  was  shouting  at   the  other 
guests too, but for some strange reason ignoring me completely as I sat in 
intense Presence. I suspected that the universal human pain­body had come 
back to tell me, “You thought you defeated me. Look, I'm still here.” I also 
considered the possibility that the released energy field left behind after our 
session followed me to the restaurant and attached itself to the one person in 
whom it found a compatible vibrational frequency, that is to say, a heavy 
pain­body.
The   manager   opened   the   door,   “Just   leave.   Just   leave.”   The   man 
zoomed out in his electric wheelchair, leaving everyone stunned. One minute 
later   he   returned.   His   pain­body  wasn't   finished  yet.  It   needed  more.  He 
pushed open the door with his wheelchair, shouting obscenities. A waitress 
tried to stop him from coming in. He put his chair in fast­forward and pinned 
her against the wall. Other guests jumped up and tried to pull him away. 
Shouting, screaming, pandemonium. A little later a policeman arrived, the 
man   became   quiet,   was   asked   to   leave   and   not   return.   The   waitress 
fortunately was not hurt, except for bruises on her legs. When it was all over, 
the manager came to my table and asked me, half joking but perhaps feeling 
intuitively that there was some connection, “Did you cause all this?”
THE PAIN­BODY IN CHILDREN
Children's   pain­bodies   sometimes   manifest   as   moodiness   or 
withdrawal. The child becomes sullen, refuses to interact, and may sit in a 
corner,   hugging   a   doll   or   sucking   a   thumb.   They   can   also   manifest   as 
weeping   fits   or   temper   tantrums.   The   child   screams,   may   throw   him   or 
herself on  the  floor,  or  become destructive. Thwarted wanting can easily 
trigger the pain­body, and in a developing ego, the force of wanting can be 
intense. Parents may watch helplessly in incomprehension and disbelief as 
their   little   angel   becomes   transformed   within   a   few   seconds   into   a   little 
monster. “Where does all that unhappiness come from?” they wonder. To a 
greater or lesser extent, it is the child's share of the collective pain­body of 
humanity which goes back to the very origin of the human ego.
But the child may also already have taken on pain from his or her 
parents' pain­bodies, and so the parents may see in the child a reflection of 
what is also in them. Highly sensitive children are particularly affected by 
their   parents'   pain­bodies.   Having   to   witness   their   parents'   insane   drama 
causes almost unbearable emotional pain, and so it is often these sensitive 
children   who   grow   into   adults   with   heavy   pain­bodies.   Children   are   not 
fooled by parents who try to hide their pain­body from them, who say to 
each other, “We mustn't fight in front of the children.” This usually means 
while   the   parents   make   polite   conversation,   the   home   is   pervaded   with 
negative energy. Suppressed pain­bodies are extremely toxic, even more so 
than openly active ones, and that psychic toxicity is absorbed by the children 
and contributes to the development of their own pain­body.
Some children learn subliminally about ego and pain­body simply by 
living   with   very   unconscious   parents.  A  woman  whose  parents   both  had 
strong egos and heavy pain­bodies told me that often when her parents were 
shouting and screaming at each other, she would look at them and although 
she loved them, would say to herself, “These people are nuts. How did I ever 
end up here?” There was already an awareness in her of the insanity of living 
in   such   a   way.   That   awareness   helped   reduce   the   amount   of   pain   she 
absorbed from her parents. 
Parents often wonder who to deal with their child's pain­body. The 
primary question is, of course, are they dealing with their own? Do they 
recognize it within themselves? Are they able to stay present enough when it 
becomes activated so that they can be aware of the emotion on the feeling 
level before it gets a chance to turn into thinking and thus into an “unhappy 
person”?
While the child is having a pain­body attack, there isn't much you can 
do   except   to   stay   present   so   that   you   are   not   drawn   into   an   emotional 
reaction. The child's pain­body would only feed on it. Pain­bodies can be 
extremely dramatic. Don't buy into the drama. Don't take it too seriously. If 
the pain­body was triggered by thwarted wanting, don't give in now to its 
demands. Otherwise, the child will learn: “The more unhappy I become, the 
more likely I am to get what I want.” This is a recipe for dysfunction in later 
life. The pain­body will be frustrated by your nonreaction and may briefly 
act   up   even   more   before   it   subsides.   Fortunately,   pain­body   episodes   in 
children are usually more short­lived than in adults. 
A little while after it has subsided, or perhaps the next day, you can 
talk to the child about what happened. But don't  tell  the child about what 
happened. Ask questions instead. For example: “What was it that came over 
you yesterday when you wouldn't stop screaming? Do you remember? What 
did it feel like? Was it a good feeling? That thing that came over you, does it 
have  a name? No? If it had a name, what would it be called? If you could 
see it, what would it look like? Can you paint a picture of what it would look 
like? What happened to it when it went away? Did it go to sleep? Do you 
think it may come back?”
These   are   just   a   few   suggested   questions.   All   these   questions   are 
designed to awaken the witnessing faculty in the child, which is Presence. 
They will help the child to disidentify from the pain­body. You may also 
want   to   talk   to   the   child   about   your   own   pain­body   using   the   child's 
terminology. The next time the child gets taken over by the pain­body, you 
can say, “It's come back, hasn't it?” Use whatever words the child used when 
you talk bout it. Direct the child's attention to what it  feels  like. Let your 
attitude   be   one   of   interest   or   curiosity   rather   than   one   of   criticism   or 
condemnation.
It is unlikely that this will stop the pain­body in its tracks, and it may 
appear that the child will not even be hearing you, yet some awareness will 
remain in the background of the child's consciousness even while the pain­
body is active. After a few times, the awareness will have gown stronger and 
the pain­body will have weakened. The child is growing in Presence. One 
day you may find that the child is the one to point out to you that your own 
pain­body has taken control of you.
UNHAPPINESS
Not   all   unhappiness   is   of   the   pain­body.   Some   of   it   is   new 
unhappiness, created whenever you are out of alignment with the present 
moment,   when   the   Now   is   denied   in   one   way   or   another.   When   you 
recognize that the present moment is always already the case and therefore 
inevitable, you can bring an uncompromising inner “yes” to it and so not 
only   create   no   further   unhappiness,   but,   with   inner   resistance   gone,   find 
yourself empowered by Life itself.
The pain­body's unhappiness is always clearly out of proportion to the 
apparent   cause.   In   other   words,   it   is   an   overreaction.   This   is   how   it   is 
recognized,   although   not   usually   by   the   sufferer,   the   person   possessed. 
Someone with a heavy pain­body easily finds reasons for being upset, angry, 
hurt, sad, or fearful. Relatively insignificant things that someone else would 
shrug   off   with   a   smile  or   not  even notice become the apparent  cause of 
intense unhappiness. They are, of course, not the true cause but only act as a 
trigger. They bring back to life the old accumulated emotion. The emotion 
then   moves   into   the   head   and   amplifies   and   energizes   the   egoic   mind 
structures. 
Pain­body   and   ego   are   close   relatives.   They   need   each   other.   The 
triggering event or situation is then interpreted and reacted to through the 
screen of a heavily emotional ego. This is to say, its significance becomes 
completely   distorted.   you   look   at   the   present   through   the   eyes   of   the 
emotional past within you. In other words, what you see and experience is 
not in the event or situation but in you. Or in some cases, it may be there in 
the   event   or   situation,   but   you   amplify   it   through   your   reaction.   This 
reaction, this amplification, is what the pain­body wants and needs, what it 
feeds on.
For someone possessed by a heavy pain­body, it is often impossible to 
step outside his or her distorted interpretation, the heavily emotional “story.” 
The   more   negative   emotion   there   is   in   a   story,   the   heavier   and   more 
impenetrable it becomes. And so the story is not recognized as such but is 
taken to be reality. When you are completely trapped in the movement of 
thought   and   the   accompanying   emotion,   stepping   outside   is   not   possible 
because you don't even know that there is an outside. You are trapped in your 
own movie or dream, trapped in your own hell. To you it is reality and no 
other reality is possible. And as far as you are concerned, your reaction is the 
only possible reaction.
BREAKING IDENTIFICATION WITH THE PAIN­BODY
A   person   with   a   strong,   active   pain­body   has   a   particular   energy 
emanation that other people perceive as extremely unpleasant. When they 
meet a person, some people will immediately want to remove themselves or 
reduce interaction with him or her to a minimum. They feel repulsed by the 
person's   energy   field.   Others   will   feel   a   wave   of   aggression   toward   this 
person, and they will be rude or attack him or her verbally and in some 
cases,   even   physically.   This   means   there   is   something   within   them   that 
resonates with the other person's pain­body. What they react to so strongly is 
also in them. It is their own pain­body.
Not surprisingly, people with heavy and frequently active pain­bodies 
often   find   themselves   in   conflict   situations.   Sometimes,   of   course   they 
actively provoke them. But at other times, they may not actually do anything. 
The   negativity   they   emanate   is   enough   to   attract   hostility   and   generate 
conflict.   It   requires   a   high   degree   of   Presence   to   avoid   reacting   when 
confronted by someone with such an active pain­body. If you are able to stay 
present, it sometimes happens that your Presence enables the other person to 
disidentify from his or her own pain­body ad thus experience the miracle of 
a   sudden   awakening.   Although   the   awakening   may   be   short­lived,   the 
awakening process will have become initiated.
One   of   the   first   such   awakenings   that   I   witnessed   happened   many 
years ago. My doorbell rang close to eleven o'clock at night. My neighbor 
Ethel's anxiety­laden voice came through the intercom. “We need to talk. 
This is very important. Please let me in.” Ethel was middle­aged, intelligent, 
and highly educated. She also had a strong ego and a heavy pain­body. She 
escaped form Nazi Germany when she was an adolescent, and many of her 
family members perished in the concentration camps. 
Ethel sat down on my sofa, agitated, her hands trembling. She took 
letters and documents out of the file she carried with her and spread them 
out all over the sofa and floor. At once I had the strange sensation as if a 
dimmer switch had turned the inside of my entire body to maximum power. 
There was nothing to do other than remain open, alert, intensely present – 
present with every cell of the body. I looked at her with no thought and no 
judgment and listened in stillness without any mental commentary. A torrent 
of words came out of her mouth. “They sent me another disturbing letter 
today. They are conducting a vendetta against me. You must help. We need 
to fight them together. Their crooked lawyers will stop at nothing. I will lose 
my home. They are threatening me with dispossession.”
It transpired that she refused to pay the service charge because the 
property   managers   had   filed   to   carry   out   some   repairs.   They   in   turn 
threatened to take her to court.
She talked for ten minutes or so. I sat, looked, and listened. Suddenly 
she stopped talking, looked at the papers all around her as if she had just 
woken up from a dream. She became calm and gentle. Her entire energy 
filed changed. Then she looked at me and said, “This isn't important at all, is 
it?” “No, it isn't,” I said. She sat quietly for a couple more minutes, then 
picked up her papers and left. The next morning she stopped me in the street, 
looking at me somewhat suspiciously. “What did you do to me? Last night 
was the first night in years that I slept well. In fact, I slept like a baby.”
She believed I had “done something” to her, but I had done nothing. 
Instead of asking what I had done to her, perhaps she should have asked 
what I had not done. I had to reacted, not confirmed the reality of her story, 
not fed her mind with more thought and her pain­body with more emotion. I 
had   allowed   her   to   experience   whatever   she   was   experiencing   at   that 
moment,   and   the   power   of   allowing   lies   in   non­interference,   non­doing. 
Being present is always infinitely more powerful than anything one could say 
or do, although sometimes being present can give rise to words or actions.
What happened to her was not yet a permanent shift, but a glimpse of 
what is possible, a glimpse of what was already within her. In Zen, such a 
glimpse is called satori. Satori is a moment of Presence, a brief stepping out 
of the voice in your head, the thought processes, and their reflection in the 
body as emotion. It is the arising of inner spaciousness where before there 
was the clutter of thought and the turmoil of emotion.
The   thinking   mind   cannot   understand   Presence   and   so   will   often 
misinterpret it. It will say that you are uncaring, distant, have no compassion, 
are not  relating.  The  truth  is, you are relating but  at  a level  deeper than 
thought and emotion. In fact, at that level there is a true coming together, a 
true joining that goes far beyond relating. In the stillness of Presence, you 
can sense the formless essence in yourself and in the other as one. Knowing 
the oneness of yourself and the other is true love, true care, true compassion.
“TRIGGERS”
Some   pain­bodies   react   to   only   one   particular   kind   of   trigger   or 
situation,   which   is   usually   one   that   resonates   with   a   certain   kind   of 
emotional pain suffered in the past. For example, if a child grows up with 
parents   for   whom   financial   issues   are   the   source   of   frequent   drama   and 
conflict, he or she may absorb the parents' fear around money and develop a 
pain­body that is triggered whenever financial issues are involved. The child 
a adult gets upset or angry even over insignificant amounts of money. Behind 
the   upset   or   anger   lies   issues   of   survival   and   intense   fear.   I   have   seen 
spiritual, that is to say, relatively conscious, people who started to shout, 
blame, and make accusations the moment they picked up the phone to talk to 
their   stockbroker   or   realtor.   Just   as   there   is   a   health   warning   on   every 
package  of  cigarettes, perhaps there should be similar warnings on every 
banknote and bank statement: “Money can activate the pain­body and cause 
complete unconsciousness.”
Someone who in childhood was neglected or abandoned by one or 
both parents will likely develop a pain­body that becomes triggered in any 
situation   that   resonates   even   remotely   with   their   primordial   pain   of 
abandonment. A friend arriving a few minutes late to pick them up at the 
airport or a spouse coming home late can trigger a major pain­body attack. If 
their   partner   or   spouse   leaves   them   or   dies,   the   emotional   pain   they 
experience goes far beyond the pain that is natural in such a situation. It may 
be   intense   anguish,   long­lasting,   incapacitating   depression,   or   obsessive 
anger.
A woman who in childhood was physically abused by her father my 
find that her pain­body becomes easily activated in any close relationship 
with a man. Alternatively, the emotion that makes up her pain­body may 
draw her to a man whose pain­body is similar to that of her father. Her pain­
body may feel a magnetic pull to someone who it senses will give it more of 
the same pain. That pain is sometimes misinterpreted as falling in love.
A man who had been an unwanted child and was given no love and a 
minimum of care and attention by his mother developed a heavy ambivalent 
pain­body that consisted of unfulfilled intense longing for his mother's love 
and attention and at the same time intense hatred toward her for withholding 
what   he   so   desperately   needed.  When  he  became  an  adult,  almost  every 
woman would trigger his pain­body's neediness – a form of emotional pain – 
and this would manifest as an addictive compulsion to “conquer and seduce” 
almost every woman he met and in this way get the female love and attention 
that the pain­body craved. He became quite an expert on seduction, but as 
soon  as  a  relationship   turned intimate or his advances were rejected, the 
pain­body's   anger   toward   his   mother   would   come   up   and   sabotage   the 
relationship.
When you recognize your own pain­body as it arises, you will also 
quickly learn what the most common triggers are that activate it, whether it 
be situations or certain things other people do or say. When those triggers 
occur,   you   will   immediately   see   them   for   what   they   are   and   enter   a 
heightened state of alertness. Within a second or two, you will also notice 
the emotional reaction that is the arising pain­body, but in that state of alert 
Presence, you won't identify with it, which means the pain­body cannot take 
you over and become the voice in your head. If you are with your partner at 
the time, you may tell him or her: “What you just said (or did) triggered my 
pain­body.” Have an agreement with your partner that whenever either of 
you says or does something that triggers the other person's pain­body, you 
will immediately mention it. In this way, the pain­body can no longer renew 
itself   through   drama   in   the   relationship   and   instead   of   pulling   you   into 
unconsciousness, will help you become fully present.
Every time you are present when the pain­body arises, some of the 
pain­body's negative emotional energy will burn up, as it were, and become 
transmuted into Presence. The rest of the pain­body will quickly withdraw 
and wait for a better opportunity to rise again, that is to say, when you are 
less conscious. A better opportunity for the pain­body to arise may come 
whenever you lose Presence, perhaps after you have had a few drinks or 
while watching a violent film. The tiniest negative motion, such as being 
irritated or anxious, can also serve as a doorway through which the pain­
body   can   return.   The   pain­body   needs   your   unconsciousness.   It   cannot 
tolerate the light of Presence.
THE PAIN­BODY AS AN AWAKENER
At first sight, it may seem that the pain­body is the greatest obstacle to 
the   arising   of   a   new   consciousness   in   humanity.   It   occupies   your   mind, 
controls and distorts your thinking, disrupts you relationships, and feels like 
a dark cloud that occupies your entire energy field. It tends to make you 
unconscious, spiritually speaking, which means totally identified with mind 
and emotion. It makes you reactive, makes you say and do things that are 
designed to increase the unhappiness within yourself and the world.
As   unhappiness   increases,   however,   it   also   causes   increasing 
disruption in your life. Perhaps the body can't take the stress anymore and 
develops an illness or some dysfunction. Perhaps you have become involved 
in an accident, some huge conflict situation or drama that was caused by the 
pain­body's   desire   for   something   bad   to   happen,   or   you   become   the 
perpetrator of physical violence. Or it all becomes too much and you cannot 
live with your unhappy self anymore. The pain­body, of course, is part of 
that false self.
Whenever you get taken over by the pain­body, whenever you don't 
recognize it or what it is, it becomes part of your ego. Whatever you identify 
with turns into ego. The pain­body is one of the most powerful things the 
ego can identify with, just as the pain­body needs the ego to renew itself 
through it. That unholy alliance, however, eventually breaks down in those 
cases where the pain­body is so heavy that the egoic mind structures, instead 
of   being   strengthened   by   it,   are   becoming   eroded   by   the   continuous 
onslaught   of   the   pain­body's   energy   charge,   in   the   same   way   that   an 
electronic device can be empowered by an electric current but also destroyed 
by it if the voltage is too high.
People with strong pain­bodies often reach a point where they feel 
their life is becoming unbearable, where they can't take any more pain, any 
more drama. One person expressed this by saying plainly and simply that she 
was “Fed up with being unhappy.” Some people may feel, as I did, that they 
cannot live with themselves anymore. Inner peace then becomes their first 
priority.   Their   acute   emotional   pain   forces   them   to   disidentify   from   the 
content of their minds and the mental­emotional structures that give birth to 
and perpetuate the unhappy me. They then know that neither their unhappy 
story nor the emotion they feel is who they are. They realize they are the 
knowing, not the known. Rather than pulling them into unconsciousness, the 
pain­body becomes their awakener, the decisive factor that forces them into a 
state of Presence.
However,  due to  the  unprecedented influx of consciousness we are 
witnessing on the planet now, many people no longer need to go through the 
depth   of   acute   suffering   to   be   able   to   disidentify   from   the   pain­body. 
Whenever they notice they have slipped back into a dysfunctional state, they 
are able to choose to step out of identification with thinking and emotion and 
enter the state of Presence. They relinquish resistance, become still and alert, 
one with what is, within and without.
The next step in human evolution is not inevitable, but for the first 
time   in   the   history   of   our   planet,   it   can   be   a   conscious   choice.   Who   is 
making   that   choice?  You  are. And who are you? Consciousness that has 
become conscious of itself. 
BREAKING FREE OF THE PAIN­BODY
A question people frequently ask is, “How long does it take to become 
free of the pain­body?” The answer is, of course, that it depends both on the 
density of an individual's pain­body as well as the degree or intensity of that 
individual's arising Presence. But it is not the pain­body, but identification 
with it that causes the suffering that you inflict on yourself and others. It is 
not the pain­body but identification with the pain­body that forces you to 
relive the past again and again and keeps you in a state of unconsciousness. 
So a more important question to ask would be this: “How long does it take to 
become free of identification with the pain­body?”
And the answer to that question: It takes no time at all. When the pain­
body is activated, know that what you are feeling is th pain­body in you. This 
knowing is all that is needed to break your identification with it. And when 
identification with it ceases, the transmutation begins. The knowing prevents 
the old emotion from rising up in your head and taking over not only the 
internal dialogue, but also your actions as well as interactions with other 
people. This mean the pain­body cannot use you anymore and renew itself 
through you. The old emotion may then still live in you for a while and come 
up periodically. It may also still occasionally trick you into identifying with 
it again and thus obscure the knowing, but not for long. Not projecting the 
old emotion into situations means facing it directly within yourself. It may 
not be pleasant, but it won't kill you. Your Presence is more than capable of 
containing it. The emotion is not who you are.
When you feel the pain­body, don't fall into the error of thinking there 
is something wrong with you. Making yourself into a problem – the ego 
loves that. The knowing needs to be followed by accepting. Anything else 
will obscure it again. Accepting means you allow yourself to feel whatever it 
is you are feeling at that moment. It is part of the is­ness of the Now. You 
can't argue with  what is. Well, you can, but if you do, you suffer. Through 
allowing, you become what you are: vast, spacious. You become whole. You 
are not a fragment anymore, which is how the ego perceives itself. Your true 
nature emerges, which is one with the nature of God.
Jesus points to this when he says, “Be ye whole, even as your Father in 
Heaven is whole.”1 The New Testament's “Be ye perfect” is a mistranslation 
of he original Greek word, which means whole. This is to say, you don't need 
to become whole, but be what you already are – with or without the pain­
body.

CHAPTER SEVEN
FINDING OUT WHO YOU REALLY ARE
Gnothi   Seauton   –  Know   Thyself.   These   words   were   inscribed   above   the 
entrance to the temple of Apollo at Delphi, site of the sacred Oracle. In 
ancient   Greece,   people   would   visit   the   Oracle   hoping   to   find   out   what 
destiny had in store for them or what course of action to take in a particular 
situation. It is likely that most visitors read those words as they entered the 
building without realizing that they pointed to a deeper truth than anything 
the Oracle could possibly tell them. They may not have realized either that, 
no   matter   how   great   a   revelation   or   how   accurate   the   information   they 
received, it would ultimately prove to be of no avail, would not save them 
from further unhappiness and self­created suffering, if they failed to find the 
truth that is concealed in that injunction – Know Thyself. What those words 
imply   is   this:   Before   you   ask   any   other   question,   first   ask   the   most 
fundamental question of your life: Who am I?
Unconscious people – and many remain unconscious, trapped in their 
egos throughout their lives – will quickly tell you who they are: their name, 
their occupation, their personal history, the shape or state of their body, and 
whatever   else   they   identify   with. Others  may  appear  to  be more  evolved 
because they think of themselves as an immortal soul or living spirit. But do 
they   really   know   themselves,   or   have   they   just   added   some   spiritual­
sounding concepts to the content of their mind? Knowing yourself goes far 
deeper than  the adoption  of a set of ideas or beliefs. Spiritual  ideas and 
beliefs may at best be helpful pointers, but in themselves they rarely have the 
power to  dislodge the more firmly established core concepts of who you 
think   you   are,   which   are   part   of   the   conditioning   of   the   human   mind. 
Knowing yourself deeply has nothing to do with whatever ideas are floating 
around in your mind. Knowing yourself is to be rooted in Being, instead of 
lost in your mind.
WHO YOU THINK YOU ARE
Your   sense   of   who   you   are   determines   what   you   perceive   as   your 
needs and what matters to you in life – and whatever matters to you will have 
the power to upset and disturb you. You can use this as a criterion to find out 
how deeply you know yourself. What matters to you is not necessarily what 
you say or believe, but what your actions and reactions reveal as important 
and serious to you. So you may what to ask yourself the question: What are 
the   things   that   upset   and   disturb   me?   If   small   things   have   the   power   to 
disturb you, then who you think you are is exactly that: small. That will be 
your unconscious belief. What are the small things? Ultimately all things are 
small things because all things are transient.
You might say, “I know I am an immortal spirit,” or “I am tired of this 
mad world, and peace is all I want” ­ until the phone rings. Bad news: The 
stock   market   has   collapsed;   the   deal   may   fall   through;   the   car   has   been 
stolen; your mother­in­law has arrived; the trip is cancelled, the contract has 
been broken; your partner has left you; they demand more money; they say 
it's your fault. Suddenly there is a surge of anger, of anxiety. A harshness 
comes   into   your   voice;   “I   can't   take   any   more   of   this.”   You   accuse   and 
blame, attack, defend, or justify yourself, and it's all happening on autopilot. 
Something  is  obviously  much more important to you now than the inner 
peace that a moment ago you said was all you wanted, and you're not an 
immortal spirit anymore either. The deal, the money, the contract, the loss or 
threat of loss are more important. To whom? To the immortal spirit that you 
said you are? No, to me. The small me that seeks security tor fulfillment in 
things that are transient and gets anxious or angry because it fails to find it. 
Well, at least now you know who you  really think you are.
If peace is really what you want, then you will choose peace. If pace 
mattered to you more than anything else and if you truly knew yourself to be 
spirit rather than a little me, you would remain nonreactive and absolutely 
alert   when   confronted   with   challenging   people   or   situations.   You   would 
immediately accept the situation and thus become one with it rather than 
separate   yourself   from   it.   Then   out   of   your   alertness   would   come   a   a 
response. Who you are (consciousness), not who you think you are (a small 
me), would be responding. It would be powerful and effective and would 
make no person or situation in to an enemy.
The world always makes sure that you cannot fool yourself for long 
about who you really think you are by showing you what truly matters to 
you.   How  you   react  to   people  and  situations,  especially when  challenges 
arise, is the best indicator of how deeply you know yourself.
The more limited, the more narrowly egoic the view of yourself, the 
more   you   will   see,   focus   on,   and   react   to   the   egoic   limitations,   the 
unconsciousness in others. Their “faults” or what you perceive as their faults 
become to you their identity. His means you will see only the ego in them 
and thus strengthen the ego in yourself. Instead of looking “through” the ego 
in others, you are looking “at” the ego. Who is looking at the ego? The ego 
in you.
Very   unconscious   people   experience   their   own   ego   through   its 
reflection in others. When you realize that what you react to in others is also 
in you (and sometimes only in you), you begin to become aware of your own 
ego. At that stage, you may also realize that you were doing to others what 
you thought others were doing to you. You cease seeing yourself as a victim.
You are not the ego, so when you become aware of the ego in you, it 
does not mean you know who you are – it means you know who you are not. 
But it is through knowing who you are not that the greatest obstacle to truly 
knowing yourself is removed.
Nobody can tell you who you are. It would just be another concept, so 
it would not change you. Who you are requires no belief. In fact, every belief 
is an obstacle. It does not even require your realization, since you already are 
who you are. But without realization, who you are does not shine forth into 
this   world.   It   remains   in   the   unmanifested   which   is,   of   course   your   true 
home. You are then like an apparently poor person who does not know he 
has a bank account with $100 million in it and so his wealth remains an 
unexpressed potential.
ABUNDANCE
Who you think you are is also intimately connected with how you see 
yourself treated by others. Many people complain that others do not treat 
them   well   enough.   “I   don't   get   any   respect,   attention,   recognition, 
acknowledgment,” they say. “I'm being taken for granted.” When people are 
kind,   they   suspect   hidden   motives.   “Others   want   to   manipulate   me,   take 
advantage of me. Nobody loves me.”
Who they think they are is this: “I am a needy 'little me' whose needs 
are   not   being   met.”   This   basic   misperception   of   who   they   are   creates 
dysfunction in all their relationships. They believe they have nothing to give 
and that the world or other people are withholding from them what they 
need. Their entire reality is based on an illusory sense of who they are. It 
sabotages situations, mar all relationships. If the thought of lack – whether it 
be money, recognition, or love – has become part of who you think you are, 
you will always experience lack. Rather than acknowledge the good that is 
already  in  your  life,   all  you see is lack. Acknowledging the good that  is 
already in your life is the foundation for all abundance. The fact is: Whatever 
you think the world is withholding from you, you are withholding from the 
world. You are withholding it because deep down you think you are small 
and that you have nothing to give.
Try this for a couple of weeks and see how it changes your reality: 
Whatever you think people are withholding from you ­ praise, appreciation, 
assistance, loving care, and so on – give it to them. You don't have it? Just 
act as if you had it, and it will come. Then, soon after you start giving, you 
will   start   receiving.   You   cannot   receive   what   you   don't   give.   Outflow 
determines inflow. Whatever you think the world is withholding from you, 
you already have, but unless you allow it to flow out, you won't even know 
that you have it. This includes abundance. The law that outflow determines 
inflow is expressed by Jesus in this powerful image: “Give and it will be 
given to you. Good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, 
will be put into your lap.”1
The source of all abundance is not outside you. It is part of who you 
are. However, start by acknowledging and recognizing abundance without. 
See the fullness of life all around you. The warmth of the sun on your skin, 
the   display   of   magnificent   flowers   outside   a   florist's   shop,   biting   into   a 
succulent fruit, or getting soaked in an abundance of water falling from the 
sky. The fullness of life is there at every step. The acknowledgment of that 
abundance that is all around you awakens the dormant abundance within. 
Then let it flow out. When you smile at a a stranger, there is already a minute 
outflow of energy. You become a giver. Ask yourself often: “What can I give 
here; how can I be of service to this person, this situation.” You don't need to 
own anything to feel abundant, although if you feel abundant consistently 
things will almost certainly come to you. Abundance comes only to those 
who already have it. It sounds almost unfair, but of course it isn't. It is a 
universal law. Both abundance and scarcity are inner states that manifest as 
your reality. Jesus puts it like this: “For to the one who has, more will be 
given, and from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.”2
KNOWING YOURSELF AND KNOWING ABOUT YOURSELF
You may not want to know yourself because you are afraid of what 
you may find out. Many people have a secret fear that they are bad. But 
nothing you can find out about yourself is you. Nothing you can know about 
you is you.
While some people do not want to know who they are because of fear, 
others have a insatiable curiosity about themselves and want to find out more 
and more. You may be so fascinated with yourself that you spend years in 
psychoanalysis, delve  into  every aspect of your childhood, uncover secret 
fears and desires, and find layers upon layers of complexity in the makeup of 
your personality and character. After ten years, the therapist may get tired of 
you and your story and tell you that your analysis is now complete. Perhaps 
he sends you away with a five­thousand­page dossier. “This is all about you. 
This   is   who   you   are.”   As   you   carry   the   heavy   file   home,   the   initial 
satisfaction of at  last  knowing yourself gives way quickly to a feeling of 
incompleteness and a lurking suspicion that there must be more to who you 
are than this. And indeed there is more – not perhaps in quantitative terms of 
more facts but in the qualitative dimension of depth. 
There is nothing wrong with psychoanalysis or finding out about your 
past   as   long   as   you   don't   confuse  knowing  about  yourself  with  knowing 
yourself. The five­thousand­page dossier is  about  yourself: the content of 
your mind which is conditioned by the past. Whatever you learn through 
psychoanalysis or self­observation is  about  you. It is not you. It is content, 
not essence. Going beyond ego is stepping out of content. Knowing yourself 
is being yourself, and being yourself is ceasing to identify with content.
Most   people   define   themselves   through   the   content   of   their   lives. 
Whatever you perceive, experience, do, think, or feel is content. Content is 
what absorbs most people's attention entirely, and it is what they identify 
with. When you think or say, “my life,” you are not referring to the life that 
you are but with the life that you have, or seem to have. You are referring to 
content – your age, health, relationships, finances, work and living situation, 
as well as your mental­emotional state. The inner and outer circumstances of 
your life, your past and your future, all belong to the realm of content – as do 
events, that is to say, anything that happens.
What is there other than content? That which enables the content to be 
– the inner space of consciousness.
CHAOS AND HIGHER ORDER
When you know yourself only through content, you will also think you 
know what is good or bad for you. You differentiate between events that are 
“good for me” and those that are “bad.” This is a fragmented perception of 
the wholeness of life in which everything is interconnected, in which every 
event has its necessary place and function within the totality. The totality, 
whoever, is more than the surface appearance of things, more than the sum 
total of its parts, more than whatever your life or the world contains.
Behind the sometimes seemingly random or even chaotic succession 
of events in our lives as well as in the world lies concealed the unfolding of a 
higher order and purpose. This is beautifully expressed in the Zen saying 
“The   snow   falls,   each   flake   in   its   appropriate   place.”   We   can   never 
understand this higher order through thinking about it because whatever we 
think about is content; whereas, the higher order emanates from the formless 
realm of consciousness, from universal intelligence. But we can glimpse it, 
and   more   than   that,   align   ourselves   with   it,   which   means   be   conscious 
participants in the unfolding of that higher purpose. 
When we go into a forest that has not been interfered with by man, our 
thinking mind will see only disorder and chaos all around us. It won't even 
be able to differentiate between life (good) and death (bad) anymore since 
everywhere new life grows out of rotting and decaying matter. Only if we are 
still enough inside and the noise of thinking subsides can we become aware 
that there is a hidden harmony here, a sacredness, a higher order in which 
everything has its perfect place and could not be other than what it is and the 
way it is. 
The mind is comfortable in a landscaped park because it has been 
planned through thought; it has not grown organically. There is an order here 
that the mind can understand. In the forest, there is an incomprehensible 
order that to the mind looks like chaos. It is beyond the mental categories of 
god and bad. You cannot understand it through thought, but you can sense it 
when   you   let   go   of   thought,   become   still   and   alert,   and   don't   try   to 
understand or explain. Only then can you be aware of he sacredness of the 
forest.   As   soon   as   you   sense   that   hidden   harmony,   that   sacredness,   you 
realize you are not separate from it, and when you realize that, you become a 
conscious participant in it. In this way, nature can help you become realigned 
with the wholeness of life.
GOOD AND BAD
At some point in their lives, most people become aware that there is 
not only birth, growth, success, good health, pleasure, and winning, but also 
loss, failure, sickness, old age, decay, pain and death. Conventionally these 
are labeled “good” and “bad,” order and disorder. The “meaning” of people's 
lives is usually associated with what they term the “good,” but the good is 
continually   threatened   by   collapse,   breakdown,   disorder;   threatened   by 
meaninglessness and  the  “bad,” when explanations fail and life ceases to 
make   sense.   Sooner   or   later,   disorder   will   irrupt   into   everyone's   life   no 
matter how many insurance policies he or she has. It may come in the form 
of   loss   or   accident,   sickness,   disability,   old   age,   death.   However,   the 
irruption   of   disorder   into   a   person's   life,   and   the   resultant   collapse   of   a 
mentally defined meaning, can become the opening into a higher order.
“The wisdom of this world is folly with God,” says the Bible. 3 What is 
the wisdom of this world? The movement of thought, and meaning that is 
defined exclusively by thought.
Thinking isolates a situation or event and calls it good or bad, as if it 
had   a   separate   existence.   Through   excessive   reliance   on   thinking,   reality 
becomes fragmented. This fragmentation is an illusion, but it seems very real 
while you are trapped in it. And yet the universe is an indivisible whole in 
which all things are interconnected, in which nothing exists in isolation.
The deeper interconnectedness of all things and events implies that the 
mental labels of “good” and bad” are ultimately illusory. They always imply 
a limited perspective and so are true only relatively and temporarily. This is 
illustrated in the story of a wise man who won an expensive car in a lottery. 
His family and friends were very happy for him and came to celebrate. “Isn't 
it great!” they said. “You are so lucky.” The man smiled and said “Maybe.” 
For a few weeks he enjoyed driving the car. Then one day a drunken driver 
crashed into his new car at an intersection and he ended up in the hospital, 
with multiple injuries. His family and friends came to see him and said, 
“That was really unfortunate. “ Again the man smiled and said, “Maybe.” 
While he was still in the hospital, one night there was a landslide and his 
house   fell   into   the   sea.   Again   his   friends   came   the   next   day   and   said, 
“Weren't you lucky to have been here in hospital.” Again he said, “Maybe.”
The   wise   man's  “maybe”  signifies  a refusal  to judge  anything that 
happens.   Instead   of   judging   what   is,   he   accepts   it   and   so   enters   into 
conscious   alignment   with   the   higher   order.   He   knows   that   often   it   is 
impossible for the mind to understand what place or purpose a seemingly 
random event has in the tapestry of the whole. But there are no random 
events, nor are there events or things that exist by and for themselves, in 
isolation. The atoms that make up your body were once forged inside stars, 
and the causes of even the smallest event are virtually infinite and connected 
with the whole in incomprehensible ways. If you wanted to trace back the 
cause of any event, you would have to go back all the way to the beginning 
of creation. The cosmos is not chaotic. The very word cosmos means order. 
But this is not an order the human mind can ever comprehend, although it 
can sometimes glimpse it. 
NOT MINDING WHAT HAPPENS
J.   Krishnamurti,   the  great   Indian   philosopher   and   spiritual   teacher, 
spoke and traveled almost continuously all over the world for more than fifty 
years attempting to convey through words ­ which are content – that which is 
beyond words, beyond content. At one of his talks in the later part of his life, 
he surprised his audience by asking, “Do you want to know my secret?” 
Everyone became very alert. Many people in the audience had been coming 
to listen to him for twenty or thirty years and still failed to grasp the essence 
of his teaching. Finally, after all these years, the master would give them the 
key   to   understanding.   “This   is   my   secret,”   he   said.   “I   don't   mind   what 
happens.”
He did not elaborate, and so I suspect most of his audience were even 
more   perplexed   than   before.   The   implications   of   this   simple   statement, 
however, are profound.
When I don't mind what happens, what does that imply? It implies 
that internally I am in alignment with what happens. “What happens,” of 
course, refers to the suchness of this moment, which always already is as it 
is. It refers to content, the form that this moment – the only moment there 
ever is – takes. To be in alignment with what is means to be in a relationship 
of inner nonresistance with what happens. It mean not to label it mentally as 
good or bad, but to let it be. Does this mean you can no longer take action to 
bring abut change in your life? On the contrary. when the basis for your 
actions is inner alignment with the present moment, your actions become 
empowered by the intelligence of Life itself.
IS THAT SO? 
The Zen Master Hakuin lived in a town in Japan. He was held in high 
regard and many people came to him for spiritual teaching. Then it happened 
that the teenage daughter of his next­door neighbor became pregnant. When 
being questioned by her angry and scolding parents as to the identity of the 
father, she finally told them that he was Hakuin, the Zen Master. In great 
anger the parents rushed over to Hakuin and told him with much shouting 
and accusing that their daughter had confessed that he was the father. All he 
replied was, “Is that so?”
News   of   the   scandal   spread   throughout   the   town   and   beyond.   The 
Master lost his reputation. This did not trouble him. Nobody came to see him 
anymore.   He   remained   unmoved.   When   the   child   was   born,   the   parents 
brought the baby to Hakuin. “You are the father, so you look after him.” The 
Master took loving care of the child. A year later, the mother remorsefully 
confessed to her parents that the real father of the child was the young man 
who worked at the butcher shop. In great distress they went to see Hakuin to 
apologize and ask for forgiveness. “We are really sorry. We have come to 
take the baby back. Our daughter confessed that you are not the father.” “Is 
that so?” is all he would may as he handed the baby over to them.
The Master responds to falsehood and truth, bad news and good news, 
in exactly the same way: “Is that so?” He allows the form of the moment, 
good or bad, to be as it is and so does not become a participant in human 
drama. To him there is only this moment, and this moment is as it is. Events 
are not personalized. He is nobody's victim. He is so completely at one with 
what happens that what happens has no power over him anymore. Only if 
you resist what happens are you at the mercy of what happens, and the world 
will determine your happiness and unhappiness.
The baby is looked after with loving care. Bad turns into good through 
the power of nonresistance. Always responding to what the present moment 
requires, he lets go of the baby when it is time to do so.
Imagine briefly how the ego would have reacted during the various 
stages of the unfolding of these events.
THE EGO AND THE PRESENT MOMENT
The most important, the primordial relationship in your life is your 
relationship with the Now, or rather with whatever form the Now takes, that 
is  to   say,  what   is  or  what   happens. If  your relationship with the Now  is 
dysfunctional, that dysfunction will be reflected in every relationship and 
every situation you encounter. The ego could be defined simply in this way: 
a dysfunctional relationship with the present moment. It is at this moment 
that you can decide what kind of relationship you want to have with the 
present moment.
Once you have reached a certain level of consciousness, (and if you 
are reading this, you almost certainly have), you are able to decide what kind 
of a relationship you want to have with the present moment. Do I want the 
present   moment   to   be   my   friend   or   my   enemy?   The   present   moment   is 
inseparable from life, so you are really deciding what kind of a relationship 
you want to have with life. Once you have decided you want the present 
moment to be your friend, it is up to you to make the first move: become 
friendly toward it, welcome it no matter in what disguise it comes, and soon 
you will see the results. Life becomes friendly toward you; people become 
helpful, circumstances cooperative. One decision changes your entire reality. 
But that one decision you have to make again and again and again – until it 
becomes natural to live in such a way.
The decision to make the present moment into your friend is the end 
of the ego. The ego can never be in alignment with the present moment, 
which is to say, aligned with life, since its very nature compels it to ignore, 
resist, or devalue the Now. Time is what the ego lives on. The stronger the 
ego, the more time takes over your life. Almost every thought you think is 
then concerned with past or future, and you sense of self depends on the past 
for   your   identity   and   on   the   future   for   its   fulfillment.   Fear,   anxiety, 
expectation, regret, guilt, anger are the dysfunctions of the time­bound state 
of consciousness.
There are three ways in which the ego will treat the present moment: 
as a means to and end, as an obstacle, or as an enemy. Let us look at them in 
turn, so that when this pattern operates in you, you can recognize it and – 
decide again.
To the ego, the present moment is, at best, only useful as a means to 
an end. It gets you to some future moment that is considered more important, 
even though the future never comes except as the present moment and is 
therefore never more than a thought in your head. In other words, you aren't 
ever fully here because you are always busy trying to get elsewhere. 
When   this   pattern   becomes   more   pronounced,   and   this   is   very 
common, the present moment is regarded and treated as if it were an obstacle 
to be overcome. This is where impatience, frustration, and stress arise, and in 
our  culture,  it  is many  people's everyday reality, their normal  state. Life, 
which is now, is seen as a “problem,” and you come to inhabit a world of 
problems that all need to be solved before you can be happy, fulfilled, or 
really start living – or so you think. The problem is: For every problem that 
is solved, another one pops up. As long as the present moment is seen as an 
obstacle, there can be no end to problems. “I'll be whatever you want me to 
be,” says Life or the Now. “I'll treat you the way you treat me. If you see me 
as a problem, I will be a problem to you. If you treat me as an obstacle, I will 
be an obstacle.”
At worst, and this is also very common, the present moment is treated 
as if it were an enemy. When you hate what you are doing, complain about 
your  surroundings,   curse   things  that  are  happening  or  have  happened,  or 
when your internal dialogue consists of shoulds and shouldn'ts, of blaming 
and accusing, when you are arguing with what is, arguing with that which is 
always already the case. you are making Life into an enemy and Life says, 
“War is what you want, and war is what you get.” External reality, which 
always reflects back to you your inner state, is then experienced as hostile. 
A vital question to ask yourself frequently is: What is my relationship 
with the present moment? Then become alert to find out the answer. Am I 
treating the Now as no more than a means to an end? Do I see it as an 
obstacle? Am I making it into an enemy? Since the present moment is all 
you ever have, since Life is inseparable from the Now, what the question 
really   means   is:   What   is   my   relationship   with   Life?   This   question   is   an 
excellent way of unmasking the ego in you and bringing you into the state of 
Presence.   Although   the   question   doesn't   embody   the   absolute   truth 
(Ultimately, I and the present moment are one), it is a useful pointer in the 
right direction. Ask yourself it often until you don't need it anymore.
How do you go beyond a dysfunctional relationship with the present 
moment? The most important thing is to see it in yourself, in your thoughts 
and actions. In the moment of seeing, of noticing that your relationship with 
the Now is dysfunctional, you are present. The seeing is the arising Presence. 
The moment you see the dysfunction, it begins to dissolve. Some people 
laugh   out   loud   when   they   see this. With the  seeing comes the  power of 
choice – the choice of saying yes to the Now, of making it into your friend.
THE PARADOX OF TIME
On the surface, the present moment is “what happens.” Since what 
happens changes continuously, it seems that every day of your life consists of 
thousands of moments in which different things happen. Time is seen as the 
endless succession of moments, some “good,” some “bad.” Yet, if you look 
more closely, that is to say, through your own immediate experience, you 
find that there are not many moments at all. You that there is only ever this 
moment.  Life is always now. Your entire life unfolds in this constant Now. 
Even past or future moments only exist when you remember or anticipate 
them, and you do so by thinking about them in the only moment there is: this 
one. 
Why does it appear then as if there were many moments? Because the 
present moment is confused with what happens, confused with content. The 
space of Now is confused with what happens in that space. The confusion of 
the present moment with content gives rise not only to the illusion of time, 
but also to the illusion of ego.
There is a paradox here. On the one hand, how can we deny the reality 
of time? You need it to go from here to there, to prepare a meal, build a 
house,   read   this   book.   You   need   time   to   grow   up,   to   learn   new   things. 
Whatever   you   do   seems   to   take   time.   everything   is   subject   to   it   and 
eventually “this bloody tyrant time,” as Shakespeare calls it, is going to kill 
you. You could compare it to a raging river that drags you along with it, or a 
fire in which everything is consumed.
I recently met some old friends, a family I had not seen in a long time, 
and I was shocked when I saw them. I almost asked, “Are you ill? What 
happened? Who did  this  to you?” The mother, who walked with a cane, 
seemed to have shrunk in size, her face shriveled like an old apple. The 
daughter , who had been full of energy, enthusiasm, and the expectations of 
youth when I last saw her, seemed worn out, tired after bringing up three 
children. Then I remembered: Almost thirty years had passed since we last 
met. Time had done this to them. And I'm sure they were just as shocked 
when they saw me.
Everything seems to be subject to time, yet it all happens in the Now. 
That is the paradox. Wherever you look, there is plenty of circumstantial 
evidence for the reality of time – a rotting apple, your face in the bathroom 
mirror compared to your face in a photo taken thirty years ago – yet you 
never find any  direct  evidence, you never experience time itself. You only 
ever experience the present moment, or rather what happens in it. If you go 
by direct evidence only, then there is no time, and the Now is all there ever 
is.
ELIMINATING TIME
  You cannot make the egoless state into a future goal and then work 
toward it. All you get is more dissatisfaction, more inner conflict, because it 
will always seem that you have not arrived yet, have not “attained” that state 
yet. When freedom from ego is your goal for the future, you give yourself 
more time, and more time means more ego. Look carefully to find out if 
your spiritual search is a disguised form of ego. Even trying to get to get rid 
of your “self” can be a disguised search for more if the getting rid of your 
“self” is made into a future goal. Giving yourself more time is precisely this: 
giving your “self” more time. Time, that is to say, past and future, is what the 
false mind­made self, the ego, lives on, and time is in your mind. It isn't 
something that has an objective existence “out there.” It is a mind structure 
needed for sensory perception, indispensable for practical purposes, but the 
greatest hindrance to knowing yourself. Time is the horizontal dimension of 
life, the surface layer of reality. Then there is the vertical dimension of depth, 
accessible to you only through the portal of the present moment.
So instead of adding time to yourself, remove time. The elimination of 
time from your consciousness is the elimination of ego. It is the only true 
spiritual practice. 
When   we  speak   of   the  elimination of  time,  we are, of  course, not 
referring to clock time, which is the use of time for practical purposes, such 
as making an appointment or planning a trip. It would be almost impossible 
to function in this world without clock time. What we are speaking of is the 
elimination   of   psychological   time,   which   is   the   egoic   mind's   endless 
preoccupation with past and future and its unwillingness to be one with life 
by living in alignment with the inevitable isness of the present moment.
 Whenever a habitual no to life turns into a yes, whenever you allow 
this moment to be as it is, you dissolve time as well as ego. For the ego to 
survive,   it   must   make  time  – past  and  future  – more  important  than the 
present moment. The ego cannot tolerate becoming friendly with the present 
moment   except   briefly   just   after   it   got   what   it   wanted.   But   nothing   can 
satisfy the ego for long. As long as it runs your life, there are two ways of 
being unhappy. Not getting what you want is one. Getting what you want is 
the other. 
Whatever is or happens is the form that the Now takes. As long as you 
resist it internally, form, that is to say, the world, is an impenetrable barrier 
that separates you from who you are beyond form, separates you from the 
formless one Life that you are. When you bring an inner yes to the form the 
Now   takes,   that   very   form   becomes   a   doorway   into   the   formless.   The 
separation between the world and God dissolves.
When you react against the form that Life takes at this moment, when 
you treat the Now as a means, an obstacle, or an enemy, you strengthen your 
own form identity, the ego. Hence the ego's reactivity. What is reactivity? 
Becoming   addicted   to   reaction.   The   more   reactive   you   are,   the   more 
entangled   you   become   with   form.   The   more   identified   with   form,   the 
stronger the ego. Your Being then does not shine through form anymore – or 
only barely.
Though   nonresistance   to   form,   that   in   you   which   is   beyond   form 
emerges as an all­encompassing Presence, a silent power far greater than 
your short­lived form identity, the person. It is more deeply who you are than 
anything in the world of form.
THE DREAMER AND THE DREAM
Nonresistance is the key to the greatest power in the universe. Through 
it,   consciousness   (spirit)   is   freed   form   its   imprisonment   in   form.   Inner 
nonresistance to form – whatever is or happens – is a denial of the absolute 
reality   of   form.   Resistance   makes   the  world  and  the  things  of   the  world 
appear more real, more solid, and more lasting than they are, including your 
own form identity, the ego. It endows the world and the ego with a heaviness 
and an absolute importance that makes you take yourself and the world very 
seriously. The play of form is then misperceived as a struggle for survival, 
and when that is your perception, it becomes your reality. 
The many things that happen, the many forms that life takes on, are of 
an ephemeral nature. They are all fleeting. Things, bodies and egos, events, 
situations, thoughts, emotions, desires, ambitions, fears, drama... they come, 
pretend to be all­important, and before you know it they are gone, dissolved 
into the no­thingness out of which they came. Where they ever real? Were 
they ever more than a dream, the dream of form? 
When we wake up in the morning, the night's dream dissolves, and we 
say, “Oh, it was only a dream. It wasn't real.” But something in the dream 
must have been real otherwise it could not be. When death approaches, we 
may look back on our life and wonder if it was just another dream. Even now 
you may look back on last year's vacation or yesterday's drama and see that it 
is very similar to last night's dream.
There is the dream, and there is the dreamer of the dream. The dream 
is   a   short­lived   play   of   forms.   It   is   the   world   –   relatively   real   but   not 
absolutely real. Then there is the dreamer, the absolute reality in which the 
forms come and go. The dreamer is not the person. The person is part of the 
dream.   The   dreamer   is   the   substratum   in   which   the   dream   appears,   that 
which makes the dream possible. It is the absolute behind the relative, the 
timeless behind time, the consciousness in and behind form. The dreamer is 
consciousness itself – who you are.
 To awaken within the dream is our purpose now. When we are awake 
within the dream, the ego­created earth­drama comes to an end and a more 
benign and wondrous dream arises. This is the new earth.
GOING BEYOND LIMITATION 
In   each   person's   life   there   comes   a   time   when   he   or   she   pursues 
growth   and   expansion   on   the   level   of   form.   This   is   when   you   strive   to 
overcome limitation such as physical weakness or financial scarcity, when 
you   acquire   new   skills   and   knowledge,   or   through   creative   action   bring 
something new into this world that is life­enhancing for yourself as well as 
others. This may be a piece of music or a work of art, a book, a service you 
provide, a function you perform, a business or organization that you set up or 
make a vital contribution to. 
When you are Present, when your attention is fully in the Now, that 
Presence will flow into and transform what you do. There will be quality and 
power in it. You are present when what you are doing is not primarily a 
means  to   an   end  (money,  prestige, winning) but fulfilling in itself, when 
there is joy and aliveness in what you do. And, of course, you cannot be 
present unless you become friendly with the present moment. That is the 
basis for effective action, uncontaminated by negativity.
Form means limitation. We are here not only to experience limitation, 
but   also   to   grow   in   consciousness   by   going   beyond   limitation.   Some 
limitations   can   be   overcome   on   an   external   level.   There   may   be   other 
limitations in your life that you have to learn to live with. They can only be 
overcome internally. Everyone will encounter them sooner or later. Those 
limitations either keep you trapped in egoic reaction, which means intense 
unhappiness,   or   you   rise   above   them   internally   by   uncompromising 
surrender to what is. That is what they are here to teach. The surrendered 
state   of   consciousness   opens   up   the   vertical   dimension   in   your   life,   the 
dimension of depth. Something will then come forth from that dimension 
into   this   world,   something   of   infinite   value   that   otherwise   would   have 
remained unmanifested. Some people who surrendered to severe limitation 
become healers or spiritual teachers. Others work selflessly to lessen human 
suffering or bring some creative gift into this world.
In the late seventies, I would have lunch every day with one or two 
friends   in   the   cafeteria   of   the   graduate   center   at   Cambridge   University, 
where   I   was   studying.   A  man   in  a   wheelchair   would  sometimes   sit   at   a 
nearby table, usually accompanied by three or four people. One day, when I 
was sitting at a table directly opposite me, I could not help but look at him 
more closely, and I was shocked by what I saw. He seemed almost totally 
paralyzed. His body was emaciated, his head permanently slumped forward. 
One   of   the   people   accompanying   him   was   carefully   putting   food   in   his 
mouth a great deal of which would fall out again and be caught on a small 
plate another man was holding under his chin. Occasionally the wheelchair­
bound   man   would   produce   unintelligible   croaking   sounds,   and   someone 
would hold an ear close to his mouth and then amazingly would interpret 
what he was trying to say.
Later I asked my friend whether he know who he was. “Of course,” he 
said, “He is a professor of mathematics, and the people with him are his 
graduate students. He has motor neuron disease that progressively paralyzes 
every part of the body. He has been given five years at the most. It must be 
the most  dreadful fate that can befall a human being.”
A few weeks later, as I was leaving the building, he was coming in, 
and when I held the door open for his electric wheelchair to come trough, 
our eyes met. With surprise I saw that his eyes were clear. There was no trace 
in them of unhappiness. I know immediately he had relinquished resistance; 
he was living in surrender.
A number of years later when buying a newspaper at a kiosk, I was 
amazed   to   see   him   on   the   front   page   of   a   popular   international   news 
magazine. Not only was he still alive, but he had by then become the world's 
most famous theoretical physicist, Stephen Hawking. There was a beautiful 
line in the article that confirmed what I had sensed when I had looked into 
his eyes many years earlier. Commenting upon his life, he said (now with the 
help of the voice synthesizer), “Who could have wished for more?”
THE JOY OF BEING
Unhappiness or negativity is a disease on our planet. What pollution is 
on the outer level is negativity on the inner. It is everywhere, not just in 
places where people don't have enough, but even more so where they have 
more than enough. Is that surprising? No. The affluent world is even more 
deeply identified with form, more lost in content, more trapped in ego.
People believe themselves to be dependent on what happens for their 
happiness, that is to say dependent on form. They don't realize that what 
happens is the most unstable thing in the universe. It changes constantly. 
They look upon the present moment as either marred by something that has 
happened and shouldn't have or as deficient because of something that has 
not happened but should have. Ad so they miss the deeper perfection that is 
inherent   in   life   itself,   a   perfection   that   is   always   already   there,   that   lies 
beyond   what   is   happening   or   not   happening,   beyond   form.   Accept   the 
present moment and find the perfection that is deeper than any form and 
untouched by time. 
The joy of Being, which is the only true happiness, can not come to 
you through any form, possession, achievement, person, or event – through 
anything that happens. That joy cannot come  to you – ever. It emanates form 
the formless dimension within you, from consciousness itself and thus is one 
with who you are.
ALLOWING THE DIMINISHMENT OF THE EGO
The ego is always on guard against any kind of perceived diminishment. 
Automatic   ego­repair   mechanisms   come   into   effect   to   restore   the   mental 
form of “me.” When someone blames or criticizes me, that to the ego is a 
diminishment of self, and it will immediately attempt to repair its diminished 
sense   of   self   through   self­justification,   defense,   or   blaming.   Whether   the 
other   person   is   right   or   wrong  is   irrelevant   to   the   ego.  It   is   much   more 
interested in self­preservation than in the truth. This is the preservation of 
the   psychological   form   of   “me.”   Even   such   a   normal   thing   as   shouting 
something back when another driver calls you “idiot” is an automatic and 
unconscious   ego­repair   mechanism.   One   of   the   most   common   ego­repair 
mechanisms is anger, which causes a temporary but huge ego inflation. All 
repair   mechanisms   make   perfect   sense   to   the   ego   but   are   actually 
dysfunctional. Those that are most extreme in their dysfunction are physical 
violence ad self­delusion in the form of grandiose fantasies.
  A   powerful   spiritual   practice   is   consciously   to   allow   the 
diminishment   of   ego   when   it   happens   without   attempting   to   restore   it.   I 
recommend that you experiment with this from time to time. For example, 
when someone criticizes you, blames you, or calls you names, instead of 
immediately retaliating or defending yourself – do nothing. Allow the self­
image to remain diminished and become alert to what that feels like deep 
inside  you.   For   a   few   seconds,   it   may  feel  uncomfortable,  as   if  you  had 
shrunk in size. Then you may sense an inner spaciousness that feels intensely 
alive. You haven't been diminished at all. In fact, you have expanded. You 
may   then   come   to   an   amazing   realization:   When   you   are   seemingly 
diminished   in   some   way   and   remain   in   absolute   non­reaction,   not   just 
externally   but   also   internally,   you   realize   that   nothing   real   has   been 
diminished, that through becoming “less,” you become more. When you no 
longer defend or attempt to strengthen the form of yourself, you step out of 
identification with form, with mental self­image. Through becoming less (in 
the ego's perception), you in fact undergo an expansion and make room for 
Being to come forward. True power, who you are beyond form, can then 
shine through the apparently weakened form. this is what Jesus means when 
he says, “Deny yourself” or “Turn the other cheek.”
This does not mean, of course, that you invite abuse or turn yourself 
into a victim of unconscious people. Sometimes a situation may demand that 
you   tell   someone   to   “back   off”   in   no   uncertain   terms.   Without   egoic 
defensiveness, there will be power behind your words, yet no reactive force. 
If necessary, you can also say not to someone firmly and clearly, and it will 
be what I call a “high­quality no” that is free of all negativity.
If you are content with being nobody in particular, content not to stand 
out,   you   align   yourself   with   the   power   of   the   universe.   What   looks   like 
weakness to the ego is in fact the only true strength. This spiritual truth is 
diametrically opposed to the values of our contemporary culture and the way 
it conditions people to behave. 
Instead   of   trying   to   be   the   mountain,   teaches   the   ancient  Tao   Te 
Ching,  “Be  the  valley   of  the  universe.”4  In this  way, you are  restored  to 
wholeness and so “All things will come to you.”5
Similarly, Jesus, in one of his parables, teaches that “When you are 
invited, go and sit in the lowest place so that when your host comes, he may 
say to you, friend, move up higher. Then you will be honored in the presence 
of all who sit at table with you. For everyone who exalts himself will be 
humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted.”6 
Another   aspect   of   this   practice   is   to   refrain   from   attempting   to 
strengthen the self by showing off, wanting to stand out, be special, make an 
impression, or demand attention. It may include occasionally refraining from 
expressing   your   opinion   when   everybody   is   expressing   his   or   hers,   and 
seeing what that  feels like.
AS WITHOUT, SO WITHIN
When you look up at the clear sky at night, you may easily realize a 
truth at once utterly simple and extraordinarily profound. What is that you 
see? The moon, planets, starts, the luminous band of the Milky Way, perhaps 
a comet or even the neighboring Andromeda Galaxy two million light years 
away. Yes, but if you simplify even more, what do you see? Objects floating 
in space. So what does the universe consist of? Objects and space.
If you don't become speechless when looking out into space on a clear 
night, you are not really looking, no aware of the totality of what is there. 
You are probably only looking at at the objects and perhaps seeking to name 
them. If you have ever experienced a sense of awe when looking into space, 
perhaps   even   felt   a   deep   reverence   in   the   face   of   this   incomprehensible 
mystery, it means you must have relinquished for a moment your desire to 
explain and label and have become aware not only of the objects in space but 
of   the  infinite  depth   of  space itself.  You must  have  become  still   enough 
inside   to   notice   the   vastness   in   which   these   countless   worlds   exist.   The 
feeling of awe is not derived from the fact that there are billions of worlds 
out there, but the depth that contains them all.
You cannot see space, of course, nor can you hear, touch, taste, or 
smell it, so how do you even know it exists? This logical­sounding question 
already contains a fundamental error. The essence of space is no­thingness, 
so it doesn't “exist” in the normal sense of the word. Only things – forms – 
exist. Even calling it space can be misleading because by naming it, you 
make it into an object.
Let   us   put   it   like   this:   There   is   something   within   you   that   has   an 
affinity with space; that is why you can be aware of it. Aware of it? That's 
not totally true either because how can you be aware of space if there is 
nothing there to be aware of?
The   answer   is   both   simple   and   profound.   When   you   are   aware   of 
space, you are not really aware of anything, except awareness itself – the 
inner space of consciousness. Through you, the universe is becoming aware 
of itself!
When the eye finds nothing to see, that no­thingness is perceived as 
space. When the ear finds nothing to hear, that no­thingness is perceived as 
stillness. When the senses, which are designed to perceive form, meet an 
absence of form, the formless consciousness that lies behind perception and 
makes   all   perception,   all   experience,   possible,   is   not   longer   obscured   by 
form. When you contemplate the unfathomable depth of space or listen to 
the   silence   in   the   early   hours   just   before   sunrise,   something   within   you 
resonates with it as if in recognition. You then sense the vast depth of space 
as your own depth, and you know that precious stillness that has no form to 
be more deeply who you are than any of the things that make up the content 
o your life. 
The   Upanishads,   the  ancient  scriptures   of   India,  point  to  the  same 
truth with these words:
What cannot be seen with the eye, but that whereby the eye 
can see: know that alone to be Brahman the Spirit and not what 
people   here   adore.   What   cannot   be   heard   with   the   ear   but   that 
whereby the ear can hear: know that alone to be Brahman the Spirit 
and not what people here adore .... What cannot be thought with the 
mind but that whereby the mind can think: know that alone to be 
Brahman the Spirit and not what people here adore.7

God, the scripture is saying, is formless consciousness and the essence 
of who you are. Everything else is form, is “what people here adore.”
The twofold reality of the universe, which consists of things and space 
–   thingness   and   no­thingness   –  is  also   your  own.  A  sane,  balanced,  and 
fruitful human  life is  a dance between the two dimensions that make up 
reality: form and space. Most people are so identified with the dimension of 
form, with sense perceptions, thoughts, and emotion, that the vital hidden 
half is missing from their lives. Their identification with form keeps them 
trapped in ego.
What you see, hear, feel, touch, or think about is only one half of 
reality, so to speak. It is form. In the teaching of Jesus, it is simply called 
“the world,” and the other dimension is “the kingdom of heaven or eternal 
life.”
Just as space enables all tings to exist and just as without silence there 
could be no sound, you would not exist without the vital formless dimension 
that is the essence of who you are. We could say “God” if the word had not 
been   so   misused.   I   prefer   to   call   it   Being.   Being   is   prior   to   existence. 
Existence is form, content, “what happens.” Existence is the foreground of 
life; Being is the background, as it were.
The collective disease of humanity is that people are so engrossed in 
what happens, so hypnotized by the world of fluctuating forms, so absorbed 
in the content of their lives, they have forgotten the essence, that which is 
beyond content, beyond form, beyond thought. They are so consumed by 
time that they have forgotten eternity, which is their origin, their home, their 
destiny. Eternity is the living reality of who you are.
Some   years   ago   when   visiting   China,   I   came   upon   a   stupa   on   a 
mountaintop near Guilin. It had writing embossed in gold on it, and I asked 
my Chinese host what it meant. “It means 'Buddha' “ he said. “Why are there 
two characters rather than one?” I asked. “One,” he explained, “means 'man.' 
The other means 'no.' And the two together means 'Buddha'.” I stood there in 
awe. The character of Buddha already contained the whole teaching of the 
Buddha, and for those who have eyes to see, the secret of life. Here are the 
two dimensions that make up reality, thingness and no­thingness, form and 
the denial of form, which is the recognition that form is not who you are.
CHAPTER EIGHT
THE DISCOVERY OF INNER SPACE
According   to   an   ancient   Sufi   story,   there   lived   a   king   in   some   Middle 
Eastern   land   who   was   continuously   torn   between   happiness   and 
despondency. The slightest thing would cause him great upset or provoke an 
intense reaction, and his happiness would quickly turn into disappointment 
and despair. A time came when the king finally got tired of himself and of 
life, and he began to seek a way out. He sent for a wise man who lived in his 
kingdom and who was reputed to be enlightened. When the wise man came, 
the king said to him, “I want to be like you. Can you give me something that 
will bring balance, serenity, and wisdom into my life? I will pay any price 
you ask.”
The wise man said, “I may be able to help you. But the price is so 
great   that   your   entire   kingdom   would   not   be   sufficient   payment   for   it. 
Therefore it will be a gift to you if you will honor it.” The king gave his 
assurances, and the wise man left.
A few weeks later, he returned and handed the king an ornate box 
carved in jade. The king opened the box and found a simple gold ring inside. 
Some letters were inscribed on the ring. The inscription read: This, too, will  
pass.  “What is the meaning of this?” asked the king. The wise man said, 
“Wear this ring always. Whatever happens, before you call it good or bad, 
touch   this   ring   and   read   the  inscription.  that   way,  you  will  always  be  at 
peace.”
This, too, will pass.  What is it about these simple words that makes 
them so powerful? Looking at it superficially, it would seem while those 
words   may   provide   some   comfort   in   a   bad   situation,   they   would   also 
diminish   the   enjoyment   of   the   good   things   n   life.   “Don't   be   too   happy, 
because it won't last.” This seems to be what they are saying when applied in 
a situation that is perceived as good.
The full import of these words becomes clear when we consider them 
in the context of two other stories that we encountered earlier. The story of 
the Zen Master whose only response was always “Is that so?” shows the 
good that comes through inner nonresistance to events, that is to say, being at 
one with what happens. The story of the man whose comment was invariably 
a laconic “Maybe” illustrates the wisdom of non­judgment, and the story of 
the ring points to the fact of impermanence which, when recognized, leads to 
non­attachment. Non­resistance, non­judgment, and non­attachment are the 
three aspects of true freedom and enlightened living. 
Those words inscribed on the ring are not telling you that you should 
not enjoy the good in your life, nor are they merely meant to provide some 
comfort  in times of suffering. They have a deeper purpose: to make you 
aware of the fleetingness of every situation, which is due to the transience of 
all forms – good or bad. When you become aware of the transience of all 
forms, your attachment to them lessens, and you disidentify from them to 
some extent. Being detached does not mean that you cannot enjoy the good 
that the world has to offer. In fact, you enjoy it more. Once you see and 
accept the transience of all things and the inevitability of change, you can 
enjoy   the   pleasures   of   the   world   while   they   last   without   fear   of   loss   or 
anxiety about the future. When you are detached, you gain a higher vantage 
point from which to view the events in your life instead of being trapped 
inside   them.   You   become   like   an   astronaut   who   sees   the   planet   Earth 
surrounded by the vastness of space and realizes a paradoxical truth: The 
earth is precious and at the same time insignificant. The recognition that 
This,   too   will   pass  brings   detachment   and   with   detachment   another 
dimension comes into your lie inner space. Through detachment, as well as 
non­judgment and inner nonresistance, you gain access to that dimension.
When you are no longer totally identified with forms, consciousness – 
who you are becomes freed form its imprisonment in form. This freedom is 
the arising of inner space. It comes as a stillness, a subtle peace deep within 
you,   even   in   the   face   of   something   seemingly   bad.  This,   too,   will   pass. 
Suddenly, there is space around the event. There is also space around the 
emotional highs and lows, even around pain. And above all, there is space 
between your thoughts. And from that space emanates a peace that is not “of 
this world,” because this world is form, and the peace is space. This is the 
peace of God.
Now you can enjoy and honor the things of this world without giving 
them an importance and significance they don't have. You can participate in 
the   dance   of   creation   and   be   active   without   attachment   to   outcome   and 
without placing unreasonable demands upon the world: Fulfill me, make me 
happy, make me feel safe, tell me who I am. The world cannot give you those 
things,   and   when   you   no   longer   have   such   expectations,   all   self­created 
suffering comes to an end. All such suffering is due to an over­valuation of 
form   and   an   unawareness   of   the   dimension   of   inner   space.   When   that 
dimension is present in your life, you can enjoy things, experiences, and the 
pleasures   of   the   sense   without   losing   yourself   in   them,   without   inner 
attachment to them, that is to say, without becoming addicted to the world.
The words This, too, will pass are pointers toward reality. In pointing 
to the impermanence of all forms, by implication, they are also pointing to 
the   eternal.   Only   the   eternal   in   you   can   recognize   the   impermanent   as 
impermanent.
When the dimension of space is lost or rather not known, the things of 
the world assume an absolute importance, a seriousness and heaviness that 
in truth they do not have. When the world is not viewed from the perspective 
of the formless, it becomes a threatening place, and ultimately a place of 
despair. The Old Testament prophet must have felt this when he wrote, “All 
things are full of weariness. A man cannot utter it.”1
OBJECT CONSCIOUSNESS AND SPACE CONSCIOUSNESS
Most   people's   lives   are   cluttered   up   with   things:   material   things, 
things   to   do,   things   to   think   about.   Their   lives   are   like   the   history   of 
humanity,   which   Winston   Churchill   defined   as   “one   damn   thing   after 
another.” Their minds are filled up with the clutter of thoughts one thought 
after another. This is the dimension of object consciousness that is many 
people's predominant reality, and that is why their lives are so out of balance. 
Object consciousness needs to be balanced by space consciousness for sanity 
to return to our planet and for humanity to fulfill its destiny. The arising of 
space consciousness is the next stage in the evolution of humanity.
Space   consciousness   mans   that   in   addition   to   being   conscious   of 
things   –   which   always   comes   down   to   sense   perceptions,   thoughts,   and 
emotions – there is an undercurrent of awareness. Awareness implies that 
you are not only conscious of things (objects), but you are also conscious of 
being conscious. If you can sense an alert inner stillness in the background 
while things happen in the foreground – that's it! This dimension is there in 
everyone, but most people are completely unaware of it. Sometimes I point 
to it by saying, “Can you feel your own Presence?”
Space consciousness represents not only freedom from ego, but also 
from   dependency   on   the   things   of   this   world,   from   materialism   and 
materiality. It is the spiritual dimension which alone can give transcendent 
and true meaning to this world.
Whenever you are upset about an event, a person, or a situation, the 
real cause is not the event, person, or situation but a loss of true perspective 
that   only   space   can   provide.   You   are   trapped   in   object   consciousness, 
unaware of the timeless inner space of consciousness itself. The words This, 
too, will pass when used as a pointer can restore awareness of that dimension 
to you.
Another   pointer   to   the   truth   in   you   is   contained   in   he   following 
statement: “I am never upset for the reason I think.”2
FALLING BELOW AND RISING ABOVE THOUGHT
When   you   are   very   tired,   you   may   become   more   peaceful,   more 
relaxed than in your usual state. this is because thinking is subsiding, and so 
you   can't   remember   your   mind­made   problematic   self   anymore.   You   are 
moving   toward   sleep.   When   you   drink   alcohol   or   take   certain   drugs 
(provided they don't trigger your pain­body), you may also feel more relaxed, 
more carefree, and perhaps more alive a for a while. You may start singing 
and dancing, which since ancient times are expressions of the joy of life. 
Because you are less burdened by your mind, you can glimpse the joy of 
Being. Perhaps this is the reason alcohol is also called “spirit.” But there is a 
high price to pay: unconsciousness. Instead of rising above thought, you have 
fallen   below   it.   A   few   more   drinks,   and   you   will   have   regressed   to   the 
vegetable realm.
Space consciousness has little to do with being “spaced out.” Both 
states   are   beyond   thought.   This   they   have   in   common.   The   fundamental 
difference,   however,   is  that  in the former, you rise above thought; in the 
latter,   you   fall   below  it.   One  is   the  next   step  in   the   evolution  of   human 
consciousness, the other a regression to a stage we left behind eons ago.
TELEVISION
Watching   television   is   the   favorite   leisure   activity   or   rather   non­
activity for millions of people around the world. The average American, by 
the time he is sixty years old, will have spent fifteen years staring at the TV 
screen. In many other countries the figures are similar.
Many people find watching TV “relaxing.” Observe yourself closely 
and   you   will   find   that   the   longer   the   screen   remains   the   focus   of   your 
attention, the more your thought activity becomes suspended, and for long 
periods   you   are   watching   the   talk   show,   game   show,   sitcom,   or   even 
commercials with almost no thought being generated by your mind. Not only 
do you not remember your problems anymore, but you become temporarily 
free of yourself – and what could be more relaxing than that?
So   dos   TV   watching   create   inner   space?   Does   it   cause   you   to   be 
present?  Unfortunately,  it  does not. Although for long periods your mind 
may not be generating any thoughts, it has linked into the thought activity of 
the television show. It has linked up with the TV version of the collective 
mind, and is thinking its thoughts. Your mind is inactive only in the sense 
that   it   is   not   producing   thoughts.   It   is,   however,   continuously   absorbing 
thoughts   and   images   that   come   through   the   TV   screen.   This   induces   a 
trancelike   passive   state   of   heightened   susceptibility,   not   unlike   hypnosis. 
That is why it lends itself to manipulation of “public opinion,” as politicians 
and special­interest groups as well as advertisers know and will pay millions 
of dollars to catch you in that state of receptive unawareness. They want their 
thoughts to become your thoughts, and usually they succeed.
So when watching television, the tendency is for you to fall below 
thought, not rise above it. Television has this in common with alcohol and 
certain other drugs. While it provides some relief from your mind, you again 
pay a high price: loss of consciousness. Like those drugs, it too has a strong 
addictive quality. You reach for the remote control to switch off and instead 
find yourself going through all the channels. Half an hour or an hour later, 
you are still watching, still going through the channels. The off button is the 
only one your finger seems unable to press. You are still watching, usually 
not   because   anything   of   interest   has   caught   your   attention,   but   precisely 
because there is nothing of interest to watch. Once you are hooked, the more 
trivial, the more meaningless, it is, the more addictive it becomes. If it were 
interesting, thought provoking, it would stimulate your mind into thinking for 
itself   again,   which   is   more   conscious   and   therefore   preferable   to   a   TV­
induced trance. Your attention would, therefore, no longer be totally held 
captive by the images on the screen.
The content of the program, if there is a certain quality to it, can to 
some   extent   counteract   and   sometimes   even   undo   the   hypnotic,   mind­
numbing effect of the medium of TV. There are some programs that have 
been   extremely   helpful   to   many   people;   have   changed   their   lives   for   the 
better, opened their heart, made them more conscious. Even some comedy 
shows,   although   they   may   be   about   nothing   in   particular,   can   be 
unintentionally spiritual by showing a caricature version of human folly and 
the ego. They teach us not to take anything too seriously, to approach life in 
a lighthearted way, and above all, they teach by making us laugh. Laughter is 
extraordinarily liberating as well as healing. Most of television, however, is 
as yet controlled by people who are totally controlled by the ego, and so the 
TV's hidden agenda becomes control of you by putting you to sleep, that is to 
say,   making   you   unconscious.   Yet   there   is   enormous   and   still   largely 
unexplored potential in the medium of television.
Avoid  watching  programs and commercials that  assault you with a 
rapid succession of images that change every two or three seconds or less. 
Excessive   TV   watching   and   those   programs   in   particular   are   largely 
responsible for attention deficit disorder, a mental dysfunction now affecting 
millions   of   children   worldwide.   A   short   attention   span   makes   all   your 
perceptions and relationships shallow and unsatisfying. Whatever you do, 
whatever   action   you   perform   in   that   state,   lacks   quality,   because   quality 
requires attention.
Frequent   and   prolonged   TV   watching   not   only   makes   you 
unconscious, it also induces passivity and drains you of energy. Therefore, 
rather   than   watching   at   random,   choose   the   programs   you   want   to   see. 
Whenever you remember to do so, feel the aliveness inside your body as you 
watch. Alternatively, be aware of your breathing from time to time. Look 
away from the screen at regular intervals so that it does not completely take 
possession of your visual sense. Don't turn up the volume any higher than 
necessary so that the TV doesn't overwhelm you on the auditory level. Use 
the   mute   button   during   commercials.   Make   sure   you   don't   go   to   sleep 
immediately after switching off the set or, even worse, fall asleep with the set 
still on.
RECOGNIZING INNER SPACE
Space   between   thoughts  is  probably already arising  sporadically  in 
your life, and you may not even know it. A consciousness mesmerized by 
experiences and conditioned to identify exclusively with form, that is to say, 
object consciousness, finds it at first almost impossible to become aware of 
space.   This   ultimately   mean   that   you   cannot   become   aware   of   yourself, 
because   you   are   always   aware   of   something   else.   You   are   continuously 
distracted by form. Even when you seem to be aware of yourself, you have 
made yourself into an object, a thought form, and so what you are aware of is 
a thought, not yourself.
When you hear of inner space, you may start seeking it, and because 
you are seeking it as if you were looking for an object or for an experience, 
you cannot find it. This is the dilemma of all those who are seeking spiritual 
realization or enlightenment. Hence, Jesus said, “The kingdom of God is not 
coming   with   signs   to   be   observed;   nor   will   they   say,   'Lo,   here   it   is!'   or 
'There!' for behold, the kingdom of God is in the midst of you.”3
If you are not spending all of your waking life in discontent, worry, 
anxiety, depression, despair, or consumed by other negative states; if you are 
able to enjoy simple things like listening to he sound of the rain or the wind; 
if you can see the beauty of clouds moving across the sky or be alone at 
times   without   feeling   lonely   or   needing   the   mental   stimulus   of 
entertainment; if you find yourself treating a complete stranger with heartfelt 
kindness without wanting anything from him or her... it means that a space 
has opened up, no matter how briefly, in the otherwise incessant stream of 
thinking that is the human mind. When this happens there is a sense of well­
being, of alive peace, even though it may be subtle. The intensity will vary 
from a perhaps barely noticeable background sense of contentment to what 
the ancient sages of India called ananda – the bliss of Being. Because you 
have been conditioned to pay attention only to form, you are probably not 
aware of it except indirectly. For example, there is a common element in the 
ability   to   see   beauty,   to   appreciate   simple   things,   to   enjoy   your   own 
company, or to relate to other people with loving kindness. This common 
element is a sense of contentment, peace, and aliveness that is the invisible 
background without which these experiences would not be possible.
Whenever there is beauty, kindness, the recognition of the goodness of 
simple things in your life, look for the background to that experience within 
yourself. But don't look for it as if you were looking for something. You 
cannot pin it down and say, “Now I have it,” or grasp it mentally and define 
it in some way. It is like the cloudless sky. It has no form. It is space; it is 
stillness, the sweetness of Being and infinitely more than these words, which 
are only pointers. When you are able to sense it directly within yourself, it 
deepens. So when you appreciate something simple – a sound, a sight, a 
touch – when you see beauty, when you feel loving kindness toward another, 
sense   the   inner   spaciousness   that   is   the   source   and   background   to   that 
experience.
Many poets  and  sages throughout the ages have observed that true 
happiness   –   I   call   it   the   joy   of   Being   –   is   found   in   simple,   seemingly 
unremarkable   things.   Most   people,   in   their   restless   search   for   something 
significant  to  happen  to   them, continuously miss the insignificant, which 
may not be insignificant at all. The philosopher Nietzsche, in a rare moment 
of deep stillness, rote, “For happiness, how little suffices for happiness!.... 
the   least   ting   precisely,   the   gentlest   thing,   the   lightest   thing,   a   lizard's 
rustling, a breath, a wisk, an eye glance – little maketh up the best happiness. 
Be still.”4
Why   is   it   the   “least   thing”   that   makes   up   “the   best   happiness”? 
Because true happiness is not caused by the thing or event, although this is 
how it first appears. The thing or event is so subtle, so unobtrusive, that it 
takes up only a small part of your consciousness – and the rest is inner space, 
consciousness itself unobstructed by form. Inner space consciousness and 
who you are in your essence are one and the same. In other words, the form 
of little things leaves room for inner space. And it is from inner space, the 
unconditioned  consciousness itself, that  true happiness, the joy of Being, 
emanates. To be aware of little, quiet things, however, you need to be quiet 
inside.   A  high   degree   of  alertness  is  required. Be still. Look. Listen. Be 
present.
Here is anther way of finding inner space: Become conscious of being 
conscious.   Say   or   think   “I   Am”   and   add   nothing   to   it.   Be   aware   of   the 
stillness that follows the I Am. Sense your presence, the naked, unveiled, 
unclothed beingness. It is untouched by young or old, rich or poor, good or 
bad, or any other attributes. It is the spacious womb of all creation, all form.
CAN YOU HEAR THE MOUNTAIN STREAM?
A Zen Master was walking in silence with one of his disciples along a 
mountain   trail.   When   they   came  to  an  ancient   cedar   tree,  they  sat   down 
under it for a simple meal of some rice and vegetables. After the meal, the 
disciple, a young monk who had not yet found the key to the mystery of Zen, 
broke the silence by asking the Master, “Master, how do I enter Zen?”
He was, of course, inquiring how to enter the state of consciousness 
which is Zen. 
The   Master  remained  silent. Almost  five  minutes  passed while  the 
disciple   anxiously   waited   for   an   answer.   He   was   about   to   ask   another 
question when the Master suddenly spoke. “Do you hear the sound of that 
mountain stream?”
The disciple had not been aware of any mountain stream. He had been 
too busy thinking about the meaning of Zen. Now as he began to listen for 
the  sound, his  noisy mind  subsided. At  first he heard nothing. Then, his 
thinking   gave  way   to   heightened alertness,  and suddenly he  did hear the 
hardly perceptible murmur of a small stream in the far distance.
“Yes, I can hear it now,” he said.
The master raised his finger and, with a look in his eyes that in some 
way was both fierce and gentle, said, “Enter Zen from there.”
The   disciple   was   stunned.   It   was   his   first   satori   –   a   flash   of 
enlightenment. He knew what Zen was without knowing what it was that he 
knew!
They continued on their journey in silence. The disciple was amazed 
at the aliveness of the world around him. He experienced everything as if for 
the   first   time.   Gradually,   however,   he   stated   thinking   again.   The   alert 
stillness became covered up again by mental noise, and before long he had 
another question. “Master,” he said, “I have been thinking. What would you 
have said if I hadn't been able to hear the mountain stream?” The master 
stopped, looked at him, raised his finger and said, “Enter Zen from there.”
RIGHT ACTION
The ego asks, How can I make this situation fulfill my needs or how 
can I get to some other situation that will fulfill my needs.
Presence is a state of inner spaciousness. When you are present, you 
ask: How do I respond to the needs of this situation, of this moment? In fact, 
you don't even need to ask the question. You are still, alert, open to what is. 
You bring a new dimension into the situation: Space. Then you look and you 
listen. Thus you become one with the situation. When instead of reacting 
against a situation, you merge with it, the solution arises out o the situation 
itself. Actually, it is not you, the person, who is looking and listening, but the 
alert stillness itself. Then, if action is possible or necessary, you take action 
or rather  right action happens through you. Right action is action that  is 
appropriate   to   the   whole.   When   the   action   is   accomplished,   the   alert, 
spacious stillness remains. There is nobody who raises his arms in a gesture 
of triumph shouting a defiant “Yeah!” There is no one ho says, “Look, I did 
that.” 
All creativity comes out of inner spaciousness. Once the creation has 
happened and something has come into form, you have to be vigilant so that 
the notion of “me” or “mine” does not arise. If you take credit for what you 
accomplished,   the   ego   has   returned,   and   the   spaciousness   has   become 
obscured.
PERCEIVING WITHOUT NAMING
Most people are only peripherally aware of the world that surrounds 
them, especially if their surroundings are familiar. The voice in the head 
absorbs the greater part of their attention. Some people feel more alive when 
they travel and visit unfamiliar places or foreign countries because at those 
times sense perception – experiencing – takes up more of heir consciousness 
than   thinking.   They   become   more   present.   Others   remain   completely 
possessed   by   the   voice   in   the   head   even   then.   Their   perceptions   and 
experiences   are   distorted   by   instant   judgments.   They   haven't   really   gone 
anywhere. Only their body is traveling, while they remain where they have 
always been: in their head.
This is most people's reality: As soon as something is perceived, it is 
named, interpreted, compared with something else, liked, disliked, or called 
good or bad by the phantom self, the ego. They are imprisoned in thought 
forms, in object consciousness.
You do not awaken spiritually until the compulsive and unconscious 
naming   ceases,   or   at   least   you   become   aware   of   it   and   thus   are   able   to 
observe   it   as  it  happens.   It   is  through  this  constant  naming  that   the  ego 
remains in place as the unobserved mind. Whenever it ceases and even when 
you just become aware of it, there is inner space, and you are not possessed 
by the mind anymore.
Choose an object close to you – a pen, a chair, a cup, a plant – and 
explore   it   visually,   that   is   to   say,   look   at   it   with   great   interest,   almost 
curiosity. Avoid any objects with strong personal associations that remind 
you of the past, such as where you bought it, who gave it to you, and so on. 
Also avoid anything that has writing on it such as a book or a bottle. It would 
stimulate thought. Without straining, relaxed but alert, give your complete 
attention to the object, every detail of it. If thoughts arise, don't get involved 
in them. It is not the thoughts you are interested in, but the act of perception 
itself. Can you take the thinking out of the perceiving? Can you look without 
the   voice   in   your   head   commenting,   drawing   conclusions,   comparing,   or 
trying to figure something out? After a couple of minutes or so, let your gaze 
wander around the room or wherever you are, your alert attention lighting up 
each thing that it rests upon.
Then, listen to any sounds that may be present. Listen to them in the 
same way as you looked at the things around you. Some sounds may be 
natural – water, wind, birds – while others are man­made. Some may be 
pleasant, others unpleasant. However don't differentiate between good and 
bad. Allow each sound to be as it is, without interpretation. Here too, relaxed 
but alert attention is the key.
When you look and listen tin this way, you may become aware of a 
subtle and at first perhaps a hardly noticeable sense of calm. Some people 
feel   it   as   a   stillness   in   the   background.   Others   call   it   peace.   When 
consciousness is no longer totally absorbed by thinking, some of it remains 
in its formless, unconditioned, original state. This is inner space.
WHO IS THE EXPERIENCER?
What you see and hear, taste, touch, and smell are, of course, sense 
objects.   They   are   what   you   experience.   But   who   is   the   subject,   the 
experiencer? If you now say, for example, “Well, of course, I , Jane Smith, 
senior accountant, forty­five years old, divorced, mother of two, American, 
am the subject, the experiencer,” you are mistaken. Jane Smith and whatever 
else becomes identified with the mental concept of Jane Smith are all objects 
of experience, not the experiencing subject. 
Every   experience   has   three  possible   ingredients:   sense   perceptions, 
thoughts  or  mental  images, and emotions. Jane Smith, senior accountant, 
forty­five   years   old,   mother   of   two,   divorced,   American   –   these   are   all 
thoughts and therefore part of what you experience the moment you think 
these thoughts. They and whatever else you can say and think about yourself 
are objects, not the subject. They are experience, not the experiencer. You 
can add a thousand more definitions (thoughts) of who you are and by doing 
so will certainly increase the complexity of the experience of yourself (as 
well as your psychiatrist's income) but, in this way, you will not end up with 
the subject, the experiencer who is prior to all experience but without whom 
there would be no experience.
So   who   is   the   experiencer?   You   are.   And   who   are   you? 
Consciousness.   And   what   is   consciousness?   This   question   cannot   be 
answered.  The  moment  you  answer it, you have falsified it, made it into 
another   object.   Consciousness,   the   traditional   word   for   which   is  spirit, 
cannot be known in the normal sense of the word, and seeing it is futile. All 
knowing is within the realm of duality – subject and object, the knower and 
the known. the subject, the I, the knower without which nothing could be 
known, perceived, thought, or felt, must remain forever unknowable. This is 
because the I has no form. Only forms can be known, and yet without the 
formless dimension, the world of form could not be. It is the luminous space 
in which the world arises and subsides. That space is the life that I Am. It is 
timeless. I Am timeless, eternal. What happens in that space is relative and 
temporary: pleasure and pain, gain and loss, birth and death. 
The greatest impediment to the discovery of inner space, the greatest 
impediment to finding the experiencer, is to become so enthralled by the 
experience that you lose yourself in it. It means consciousness is lost in its 
own dream. You get taken in by every thought, every emotion, and every 
experience to such a degree that you are in fact in a dreamlike state. This has 
been the normal state of humanity for thousands of years.
Although you cannot know consciousness, you can become conscious 
of it as yourself. You can sense it directly in any situation, no matter where 
you are. You can sense it here and now as your very Presence, the inner 
space in which the words on this page are perceived and become thoughts. It 
is   the   underlying   I   Am.   The   word   you   are   reading   and   thinking   are   the 
foreground, and the I Am is the substratum, the underlying background to 
every experience, thought, feeling.
THE BREATH 
Discover   inner   space   by   creating   gaps   in   the   stream   of   thinking. 
Without those gaps, your thinking becomes repetitive, uninspired, devoid or 
any creative spark, which is how it still is for most people on the planet. You 
don't need to be concerned with the duration of those gaps. A few seconds is 
good   enough.   Gradually,   they   will   lengthen   by   themselves,   without   any 
effort on your part. More important than their length is to bring them in 
frequently so that your daily activities and your stream of thinking become 
interspersed with space.
Someone   recently   showed   me   the   annual   prospectus   of   a   large 
spiritual  organization.  When I looked through it, I was impressed by the 
wide  choice  of  interesting  seminars and workshops. It reminded me of a 
smorgasbord, on of those Scandinavian buffets where you can take your pick 
from a huge variety of enticing dishes. The person asked me whether I could 
recommend one or two courses. “I don't know,” I said. “They all look so 
interesting. But I do know this,” I added. “Be aware of your breathing as 
often as you are able, whenever you remember. Do that for one year, and it 
will be more powerfully transformative than attending all of these courses. 
And it's free.”
Being aware of your breathing takes attention away from thinking and 
creates   space.   It   is   one   way   of   generating   consciousness.   Although   the 
fullness of consciousness is already there as the unmanifested, we are here to 
bring consciousness into this dimension. 
Be aware of your breathing. Notice the sensation of the breath. Feel 
the air moving in and out of your body. Notice how the chest and abdomen 
expand   and   contract   slightly   with   the   in   and   out   breath.   One   conscious 
breath   is   enough   to   make   some   space   where   before   there   was   the 
uninterrupted succession of one thought after another. One conscious breath 
(two or three would be even better), taken many times a day, is an excellent 
way of bringing space into your life. Even if you meditated on your breathing 
for two hours or more, which some people do, one breath is all you ever need 
to   be   aware   of,   indeed   ever   can   be   aware   of.   The   rest   is   memory   or 
anticipation, which is to say, thought. Breathing isn't really something that 
you do but something that you witness as it happens. Breathing happens by 
itself. The intelligence within the body is doing it. All you have to do is 
watch it happening. There is no strain or effort involved. Also, notice the 
brief cessation of the breath, particularly the still point at the end of the out­
breath, before you start breathing in again.
Many people's breath is unnaturally shallow. The more you are aware 
of the breath, the more its natural depth will reestablish itself.
Because breath has no form as such, it has since ancient times been 
equated with spirit ­the formless one Life. “God formed man of dust from 
the  ground   and   breathed   into  his   nostrils  the   breath  of   life   and  the  man 
became a living creature.”5  The German word for breathing –  atmen  – is 
derived   from   the   ancient   Indian   (Sanskrit)   word  Atman,   meaning   the 
indwelling divine spirit or God within.
The fact that breath has no form is one of the reasons why breath 
awareness is an extremely effective way of bringing space into your life, of 
generating   consciousness.   It   is   an   excellent   meditation   object   precisely 
because it is not an object; has no shape or form. The other reason is that 
breath is one of the most subtle and seemingly insignificant phenomena, the 
“least   thing”  that   according   to Nietzsche makes  up the “best   happiness.” 
Whether or not you practice breath awareness as an actual formal meditation 
is up to you. Formal meditation, however, is no substitute for bringing space 
consciousness into everyday life.
Being aware of your breath forces you into the present moment – the 
key to all inner transformation. Whenever you are conscious of the breath , 
you are absolutely present. You may also notice that you cannot think and be 
aware of your breathing. Conscious breathing stops your mind. But far from 
being in a trance or half asleep, you are fully awake and highly alert. You are 
not falling below thinking, but rising above it. And if you look more closely, 
you will find that those two things – coming fully into the present moment 
and ceasing thinking without loss of consciousness – are actually one and 
the same: the arising of space consciousness.
ADDICTIONS
A   long­standing   compulsive   behavior   pattern   may   be   called   an 
addiction,   and   an   addiction   lives   inside   you   as   a   quasi­entity   or   sub­
personality, an energy field that periodically takes you over completely. It 
even takes over your mind, the voice in your head, which then becomes the 
voice   of   the   addiction.   It   may   be   saying,   “You've   had   a   rough   day.   You 
deserve a treat. Why deny yourself the only pleasure that is left in your life?” 
And so, if you are identified with the internal voice due to lack of awareness, 
you find yourself walking to the fridge and reaching for that rich chocolate 
cake. At other times, the addiction may bypass the thinking mind completely 
and you suddenly find yourself puffing on a cigarette or holding a drink. 
“How did that get into my hand?” Taking the cigarette out of the packet and 
lighting it, or pouring yourself a drink were actions performed in complete 
unconsciousness.
If   you   have   a   compulsive   behavior   pattern   such   as   smoking, 
overeating, drinking, TV watching, Internet addiction, or whatever it may be, 
this is what you can do: When you notice the compulsive need arising in 
you, stop and take three conscious breaths. This generates awareness. Then 
for a few minutes be aware of the compulsive urge itself as an energy field 
inside you. Consciously feel that need to physically or mentally ingest or 
consume   a   certain   substance   or   the   desire   to   act   out   some   form   of 
compulsive behavior. Then take a few more conscious breaths. After that you 
may find that the compulsive urge has disappeared  ­ for the time being. or 
you may find that it still overpowers you, and you cannot help but indulge or 
act it out again. Don't make it into a problem. Make the addiction part of 
your awareness practice in the way described above. As awareness grows, 
addictive patterns will weaken and eventually dissolve. Remember, however, 
to   catch   any  thoughts  that  justify the addictive behavior, sometimes with 
clever arguments, as they arise in you mind. Ask yourself, Who is talking 
here? And you will realize the addiction is talking. As long as you know that, 
as long as you are present as the observer of your mind, it is less likely to 
trick you into doing what it wants.
INNER BODY AWARENESS
Another simple but highly effective way of finding space in you life is 
closely linked to the breath. You will find that by feeling the subtle flow of 
air in and out of the body as well as the rise and fall of your chest and 
abdomen, you are also becoming aware of the inner body. Your attention 
may then shift from the breath to that felt aliveness within you, diffused 
throughout the body.
Most people are so distracted by their thoughts, so identified with the 
voices in their heads, they can no longer feel the aliveness within them. To 
be unable to feel the life that animates the physical body, the very life that 
you are, is the greatest deprivation that can happen to you. You then begin to 
look not only for substitutes for that natural state of well­being within, but 
also for something to cover up the continuous unease that you feel when you 
are   not   in   touch   with   the   aliveness   that   is   always   there   but   usually 
overlooked. Some of the substitutes people seek out are drug­induced highs, 
sensory overstimulation such as excessively loud music, thrills or dangerous 
activities, or an obsession with sex. Even drama in relationships is used as a 
substitute for that genuine sense of aliveness. The most sought­after cover­up 
for the continuous background unease are intimate relationships: a man or a 
woman who is going to “make me happy.” It is, of course, also one of the 
most  frequently  experienced of all  the “letdowns.” And when the unease 
surfaces again, people will usually blame their partner for it.
Take  two   or   three   conscious   breaths.   Now  see   if   you   can   detect   a 
subtle sense of aliveness that pervades your entire inner body. Can you feel 
your body from within, so to speak? Sense briefly specific parts of your 
body.  Feel  your  hands, then your arms feet, and legs. Can you feel  your 
abdomen, chest, neck and head? What about your lips? Is there life in them? 
Then become aware again of the inner body as a whole. You may want to 
close your eyes initially for this practice, and once you can feel your body, 
open your eyes, look around, and continue to feel your body at the same 
time. Some readers may find there is no need to close their eyes; they can in 
fact feel their inner body as they read this. 
INNER AND OUTER SPACE
Your inner body is not solid but spacious. It is not your physical form 
but the life that animates the physical form. It is the intelligence that created 
and   sustains   the   body,   simultaneously   coordinating   hundreds   of   different 
functions of such extraordinary complexity that the human mind can only 
understand a tiny fraction of it. When you become aware of it, what is really 
happening is that the intelligence is becoming aware of itself. It is the elusive 
“life”   that   no   scientist   has   ever   found   because   the   consciousness   that   is 
looking for it is it.
Physicists have discovered that the apparent solidity of matter is an 
illusion created by our senses. this includes the physical body, which we 
perceive and think of as form, but 99.99% of which is actually empty space. 
This is how vast the space is between the atoms compared to their size,and 
there is as much space again within each atom. The physical body is no more 
than a misperception of who you are. In many ways, it is a microcosmic 
version of outer space. To give you an idea of how vast the space ins between 
celestial bodies, consider this: light traveling at a constant speed of 186,000 
miles (300,000 kilometers) per second takes just over one second to travel 
between   the   earth   and   the   moon;   light   from   the   sun   takes   about   eight 
minutes to reach the earth. Light from our nearest neighbor in space, a star 
called Proxima Centauri, which is the sun that is closest to our own sun, 
travels for 4.5 years before it reaches the earth. This is how vast the space is 
that surrounds us. And then there is the intergalactic space, whose vastness 
defies   all   comprehension.   Light   from   the   galaxy   closest   to   our   own,   the 
Andromeda Galaxy, takes 2.4 million years to reach us. Isn't it amazing that 
your body is just as spacious as the universe?
So   your   physical   body,   which   is   form   reveals   itself   as   essentially 
formless when you go deeper into it. It becomes a doorway into inner space. 
Although inner space has no form, it is intensely alive. That “empty space” 
is life in its fullness, the unmanifested Source out of which all manifestation 
flows. The traditional word for that Source is God.
Thoughts and words belong to the world of form; they cannot express 
the   formless.   So   when   you   say,   “I   can   feel   my   inner   body”   that   is   a 
misperception   created   by   thought.   What   is   really   happening   is   hat   the 
consciousness that appears as the body – the consciousness that I Am – is 
becoming conscious of itself. When I no longer confuse who I am with a 
temporary form of “me,” then the dimension of the limitless and the eternal 
– God can express itself through “me” and guide “me.” it also fees me from 
dependency on form. However, a purely intellectual recognition or belief “I 
am   not   this   form”   does   not   help.   The   all­important   question   is:   At   this 
moment, can I sense the presence of inner space, which really means, can I 
sense my own Presence, or rather, the Presence that I Am?
Or we an approach this truth sing a different pointer. Ask yourself, 
“Am I aware not only of what is happening at this moment, but also of the 
Now itself as the living timeless inner space in which everything happens?” 
Although this question seems to have nothing to do with the inner body, yo 
may be surprised that by becoming aware of the space of Now, you suddenly 
feel more alive inside. Yo are feeling the aliveness of the inner boy – the 
aliveness that is an intrinsic part of th joy of Being. We have to enter the 
body to go beyond it and find out that we are not that.
As much as possible in everyday life, use awareness of the inner body 
to create space. When waiting, when listening to someone, when pausing to 
look at the sky, a tree, a flower, your partner, or child, feel the aliveness 
within at the same time. This means part of your attention or consciousness 
remains   formless,   an   the   rest   is   available   for   the   outer   world   of   form. 
Whenever you “inhabit” your body in this way, it serves as an anchor for 
staying present in the Now. It prevents you from losing yourself in thinking, 
in emotions, or in external situations. 
When you think, feel, perceive, and experience, consciousness is born 
into form. It is reincarnating ­ into a thought, a feeling, a sense perception, 
an   experience.   The   cycle   of   rebirths   that   Buddhists   hope   to   get   out   of 
eventually is happening continuously, and it is only at this moment – through 
the power of Now – that you can get out of it. Through complete acceptance 
of the form of Now, you become internally aligned with space, which is the 
essence of Now. Through acceptance, you become spacious inside. Aligned 
with space instead of form: That brings true perspective and balance into 
your life.
NOTICING THE GAPS
Throughout the day, there is a continuously changing succession of things 
that you see and hear. In the first moment of seeing something or hearing a 
sound – and more so if it is unfamiliar – before the mind names or interprets 
what your see or hear, there is usually a gap of alert attention in which the 
perception occurs. That is the inner space. Its duration differs from person to 
person. It is easy to miss because in many people those spaces are extremely 
short, perhaps only a second or less.
This is what happens: A new sight or sound arises, and in the first 
moment of perception, there is a brief cessation in the habitual stream of 
thinking. Consciousness is diverted away form thought because it is required 
for   sense   perception.   A   very   unusual   sight   or   sound   may   leave   you 
“speechless” ­ even inside, that is to say, bring about a longer gap.
The frequency and duration of those spaces determine your ability to 
enjoy life, to feel an inner connectedness with other human beings as well as 
nature. It also determines the degree to which you are free of ego because 
ego implies complete unawareness of the dimension of space.
When   you   become   conscious   of   these   brief   spaces   they   happen 
naturally,   they   will   lengthen,   and   as   they   do,   you   will   experience   with 
increasing frequency the joy of perceiving with little or no interference of 
thinking. The world around you then feels fresh, new, and alive. The more 
you   perceive   life   through   a   mental   screen   of   abstraction   and 
conceptualization, the more lifeless and flat the world around you becomes.
LOSE YOURSELF TO FIND YOURSELF
Inner space also arises whenever you let go of the need to emphasize 
your form­identity. That need is of the ego. It is not a true need. We have 
already   touched   briefly   upon this. Whenever  you relinquish one of  these 
behavior patterns, inner space emerges. You become more truly yourself. To 
the ego it will seem as if you were losing yourself, but the opposite is the 
case. Jesus already taught that you need to lose yourself to find yourself. 
Whenever you let go of one of these patterns, you de­emphasize who you are 
on the level of form and who you are beyond form emerges more fully. You 
become less, so you can be more.
Here are some ways in which people unconsciously try to emphasize 
their form­identity. If you are alert enough, you may be be to detect some of 
these   unconscious   patterns   within   yourself:   demanding   recognition   for 
something you did and getting angry or upset if you don't get it; trying to get 
attention   by   talking   about   your   problems,   the   story   of   your   illnesses,   or 
making a scene; giving your opinion when nobody has asked for it and it 
makes no difference to the situation; being more concerned with how the 
other person sees you than with the other person, which is to say, using other 
people     for   egoic   reflection   or   as   as   ego   enhancers;   trying   to   make   an 
impression on  others  through possessions, knowledge, good looks, status, 
physical strength,and so on; bringing about temporary ego inflation through 
angry   reaction   against   something   to   someone;   taking   things   personally, 
feeling   offended;   making   yourself   right   and   others   wrong   through   futile 
mental or verbal complaining; wanting to be seen, or to appear important.
Once you have detected such a pattern within yourself, I suggest that 
you conduct an experiment. Find out what it feels like and what happens if 
you let go of that pattern. Just drop it and see what happens.
De­emphasizing who you are on the level of form is another way of 
generating consciousness. Discover the enormous power hat flows through 
you into the world when you sot emphasizing your form­identity.
STILLNESS
It has been said:”Stillness is the language God speaks, and everything 
else   is   a   bad   translation.”   Stillness   is   really   another   word   for   space. 
Becoming conscious of stillness whenever we encounter it in our lives will 
connect us with the formless and timeless dimension within ourselves, that 
which is beyond thought, beyond ego. It may be the stillness that pervades 
the world of nature, or the stillness in your room in the early hours of the 
morning, or the silent gaps in between sounds. Stillness has no form – that is 
why through thinking we cannot become aware of it. Thought is form. Being 
aware of stillness means to be still. To be still is to be conscious without 
thought. You are never more essentially, more deeply, yourself, than when 
you   are   still.   When   you   are   still,   you   are   who   you   were   before   you 
temporarily assumed this physical and mental form called a person. You are 
also who you will be when the form dissolves. When you are still, you are 
who   you   are   beyond   your   temporal   existence:   consciousness   – 
unconditioned, formless, eternal. 

CHAPTER NINE
YOUR INNER PURPOSE
As   soon   as   you   rise   above   mere   survival,   the   question   of   meaning   and 
purpose becomes of paramount importance in your life. Many people feel 
caught up in the routines of daily living that seem to deprive their life of 
significance. Some believe life is passing them by or has passed them by 
already.   Others   feel   severely   restricted   by   the   demands   of   their   job   an 
supporting   a   family   or   by   their   financial   or   living   situation.   Some   are 
consumed by acute stress, others by acute boredom. Some are lost in frantic 
doing; others are lost in stagnation. Many people long for the freedom and 
expansion   that   prosperity   promises.   Others   already   enjoy   the   relative 
freedom that comes with prosperity and discover that even that is not enough 
to endow their lives with meaning. There is no substitute for finding true 
purpose. But the true or primary purpose of your life cannot be found on the 
outer level. It does not concern what you do but what you are – that is to say, 
your state of consciousness. 
So the most important thing to realize is this: Your life has an inner 
purpose and an outer purpose. Inner purpose concerns Being and is primary. 
Outer  purpose   concerns   doing  and  is   secondary.  While   this  book  speaks 
mainly of your inner purpose, this chapter and the next will also address the 
question of how to align outer purpose and inner purpose in your life. Inner 
and outer, however, are so intertwined that is almost impossible to speak of 
one without referring to the other.
Your inner purpose is to awaken. It is as simple as that. You share that 
purpose with every other person on the planet – because it is the purpose of 
humanity.   Your   inner   purpose   is   an   essential   part   of   the   purpose   of   the 
whole, the universe and its emerging intelligence. Your outer purpose can 
change over time. It varies greatly from person to person. Finding and living 
in alignment with the inner purpose is the foundation for fulfilling your outer 
purpose. It is the basis for true success. Without that alignment, you can still 
achieve certain things through effort, struggle, determination, and sheer hard 
work or cunning. But there is no joy in such endeavor, and it invariably ends 
in some form of suffering. 
AWAKENING 
Awakening   is   a   shift   in   consciousness   in   which   thinking   and 
awareness separate. For most people it is not an event but a process they 
undergo. Even those rare beings who experience a sudden, dramatic, and 
seemingly irreversible wakening will still go through a process in which the 
new state of consciousness gradually flows into and transforms everything 
they do and so becomes integrated into their lives.
Instead   of   being   lost   in   your   thinking,   when   you   are   awake   you 
recognize yourself as the awareness behind it. Thinking then ceases to be a 
self­serving autonomous activity that takes possession of you and runs your 
life. Awareness takes over from thinking. Instead of being in charge or your 
life,   thinking   becomes   the   servant   of   awareness.   Awareness   is   conscious 
connection   with   universal   intelligence.   Another   word   for   it   is   Presence: 
consciousness without thought.
The initiation of the awakening process is an act of grace. You cannot 
make it happen nor can you prepare yourself for it or accumulate credits 
toward it. There isn't a tidy sequence of logical steps that leads toward it, 
although the mind would love that. You don't have to become worthy first. It 
may come to the sinner before it comes to the saint, but not necessarily. 
That's why Jesus associated with all kinds of people, not just the respectable 
ones. There is nothing you can do about awakening. Whatever you do will be 
the ego trying to add awakening or enlightenment to itself as its most prized 
possession and thereby making itself more important and bigger. Instead of 
awakening, you add the  concept  of awakening to your mind, or the mental 
image of what an awakened or enlightened person is like, and then try to live 
up to that image. Living up to an image that you have of yourself or that 
other people have of you is inauthentic living – another unconscious role the 
ego plays.
So   if   there   is   nothing   you  can  do  about   wakening,  if  it  has   either 
already happened or not yet happened, how can it be the primary purpose of 
your life? Does not purpose imply that you can do something about it?
Only the first awakening, the first glimpse of consciousness without 
thought, happens by  grace, without any doing on your part. If you find this 
book incomprehensible or meaningless, it has not yet happened to you. If 
something within you responds to it, however, if you somehow recognize the 
truth in it, it means the process of awakening has begun. Once it has done so, 
it   cannot   be   reversed,   although   it   can   be   delayed   by   the   ego.   For   some 
people,   the   reading   of  this  book will   initiate the awakening  process.  For 
others, the function of this book is to help them recognize that they have 
already begun to awaken and to intensify and accelerate the process. Another 
function   of   this   book   is   to   help   people   recognize   the   ego   within   them 
whenever it tries to regain control and obscure the arising awareness.
For some, the awakening happens as they suddenly become aware of 
the  kinds  of  thoughts  they  habitually think, especially persistent negative 
thoughts that they may have been identified with all of their lives. Suddenly 
there is an awareness that is aware of thought but is not part of it.
What is the relationship between awareness and thinking? Awareness 
is the space in which thoughts exist when that space has become conscious 
of itself. 
Once you have had a glimpse of awareness or Presence, you know it 
firsthand. It is no longer just a concept in your mind. You can then make a 
conscious choice to be present rather than to indulge in useless thinking. You 
can invite Presence into your life, that is to say, make space. With the grace 
of awakening comes responsibility. You can either try to go on as if nothing 
has happened, or you can see its significance and recognize the arising of 
awareness   as   the   most   important   thing   that  can  happen  to   you.   Opening 
yourself to the emerging consciousness and bringing this light into this world 
then becomes the primary purpose of your life. 
“I   want   to   know   the   mind   of   God,”   Einstein   said.   “The   rest   are 
details.” What is the mind of God? Consciousness. What does it mean to 
know   the   mind   of   God?   To   be   aware.   What   are   the   details?   Your   outer 
purpose, and whatever happens outwardly.
So   while  you  are  perhaps still  waiting for something significant  to 
happen in your life, you may not realize that the most significant thing that 
can   happen   to   a   human   being   has   already   happened   within   you:   the 
beginning of the separation process of thinking and awareness.
Many   people   who   are   going   through   the   early   stages   of   the   awakening 
process are no longer certain what their outer purpose is. What drives the 
world   no   longer   drives   them.   Seeing   the   madness   of   our   civilization   so 
clearly,   they   may   feel  somewhat  alienated from  the culture around them. 
Some feel that they inhabit a no­man's land between two worlds. They are no 
longer run by the ego, yet the arising awareness has not yet become fully 
integrated into their lives. Inner and outer purpose have not merged.
A DIALOGUE ON INNER PURPOSE
The following dialogue condenses numerous conversations I have had 
with people who were looking for their true life purpose. Something is true 
when   it   resonates   with   and   expresses   your   innermost   Being,   when   it   is 
alignment with your inner purpose. This is why I am directing their attention 
to their inner and primary purpose first.
I don't know exactly what it is, but I want some change in my life. I 
want expansion; I want to be doing something meaningful and, yes, I want  
prosperity   and   the   freedom   that   comes   with   it.   I   want   to   do   something 
significant, something that makes a difference tin the world. But if you asked  
me what exactly I want, I would have to say that I don't know. Can you help  
me find my life purpose?
Your purpose is to sit here and talk to me, because that's where you 
are and that's what you are doing. Until you get up and do something else. 
Then, that becomes your purpose.
 
So my purpose is to sit in my office for the next thirty years until I  
retire or get laid off?
You are not in your office now, so that's not your purpose. When you 
do sit in your office and do whatever you do, then that is your purpose. Not 
for the next thirty years, but for now.
I think here is some misunderstanding here. For you, purpose means  
what  you  are  doing  now;  for me it  means having an overall aim in life, 
something big and significant that gives meaning to what I do, something  
that makes a difference. Shuffling papers in the office is not it. I know that.
As long as your are unaware of Being, you will seek meaning only 
within the dimension of doing and of future, that is to say, the dimension of 
time. And whatever meaning or fulfillment you find will dissolve or turn out 
to   have   been   a   deception.   Invariably,   it   will   be   destroyed   by   time.   Any 
meaning we find on that level is true only relatively and temporarily. For 
example, if caring for your children gives meaning to your life, what happens 
to that meaning when they don't need you and perhaps don't even listen to 
you anymore? If helping others gives meaning to your life, you depend on 
others being worse off than yourself so that your life can continue to be 
meaningful and you can feel good about yourself. If the desire to excel, win, 
or succeed at this or that activity provides you with meaning, what if you 
never win or your winning streak comes to an end one day, as it will? You 
would   then   have   to   look   to   your   imagination   or   memories   –   a   very 
unsatisfactory place to bring some meager meaning into your life. “Making 
it” in whatever field is only meaningful as long as there are thousands or 
millions of others who don't make it, so you need other human beings to 
“fail” so that your life can have meaning. 
I am not saying here that helping others, caring for you children, or 
striving for excellence in whatever field are not worthwhile things to do. For 
many people, they are an important part of their outer purpose, but outer 
purpose alone is always relative, unstable, and impermanent. This does not 
mean that you should not be engaged in those activities. It means you should 
connect them to your inner, primary purpose, so that a deeper meaning flows 
into what you do.
Without   living   in   alignment   with   your   primary   purpose,   whatever 
purpose you come up with, even if it is to create heaven on earth, will be of 
the   ego   or   become   destroyed   by   time.   Sooner   or   later,   it   will   lead   to 
suffering. If you ignore your inner purpose, no matter what you do, even if it 
looks spiritual, the ego will creep into how you do it, and so the means will 
corrupt the end. The common saying “The road to hell is paved with good 
intentions”   points   to   this   book   or   walking   across   the   room.   The   main 
purpose for turning the pages is to turn the pages; the secondary purpose is 
to find a phone number. The main purpose for walking across the room is to 
walk across the room; the secondary purpose is to pick up a book at the 
other end, ad the moment you pick up the book, that becomes your main 
purpose. 
You   may   remember   the   paradox   of   time   we   mentioned   earlier: 
Whatever you do takes time, and yet it is always now. So while your inner 
purpose is to negate time, your outer purpose necessarily involves future and 
so could not exist without time. But it is always secondary. Whenever you 
become anxious or stressed, outer purpose has taken over, and you lost sight 
of your inner purpose. You have forgotten that your state of consciousness is 
primary, all else secondary.
Would living like this not stop me form looking to achieve something  
great? My fear is that I will remain stuck with doing little things for the rest  
of my life, things that are of no consequence. I'm afraid of never rising above  
mediocrity,   never   daring   to   achieve   anything   great,   not   fulfilling   my  
potential.
The great arises out of small things that are honored and cared for. 
Everybody's   life   really   consists   of   small   things.   Greatness   is   a   mental 
abstraction   and   a   favorite   fantasy   of   the   ego.   The   paradox   is   that   the 
foundation for greatness is honoring the small things of the present moment 
instead of pursuing the idea of greatness. The present moment is always all 
in the sense that it is always simple, but concealed within it lies the greatest 
power. Like the atom, it is one of the smallest things yet contains enormous 
power. Only when you align yourself with the present moment do you have 
access to that power. Or it may be more true to say that it then has access to 
you and through you to tis world. Jesus was referring to this power when he 
said, “It is not I but the Father within me who does the works.” And “I can of 
my own self do nothing.”1  Anxiety, stress, and negativity cut you off from 
that power. The illusion that you are separate form the power that runs the 
universe   returns.   You   feel   yourself   to   be   alone   again,   struggling   against 
something or trying to achieve this or that. But why did anxiety, stress, or 
negativity arise? Because you turned away from the present moment. And 
why did you do that? You thought something else was more important. You 
forgot   your   main   purpose.   One   small   error,   one   misperception,   creates   a 
world of suffering. 
Through   the   present   moment   you  have  access   tot   he  power   of   life 
itself, that which has traditionally been called “God.” As soon as you turn 
away form it, God ceases to be a reality in your life, and and all you are left 
with is the mental concept of God, which some people believe in and others 
deny. Even belief in God is only a poor substitute for the living reality of 
God manifesting every moment of your life.
Would   complete   harmony   with   the   present   moment   not   imply   the  
cessation of all movement? Doesn't the existence of any goal imply that there 
is  a   temporary  disruption   in that harmony with the present moment and  
perhaps a reestablishment of harmony at a higher or more complex level  
once the goal has been attained? I imagine that the sapling that pushes its 
way  through   the  soil   can't  be in total harmony with the present  moment  
either because it has a goal: It wants to become a big tree. Maybe once it  
has reached maturity it will lie in harmony with the present moment.
The sapling doesn't want anything because it is at one with the totality, 
and the totality acts through it. “Look at the lilies of the field, how they 
grow” said Jesus, “They toil not, neither do they spin. Yet even Solomon in 
all   his   glory   was   not   arrayed  like   one   of   these.”2  We   could  say   that   the 
totality – Life – wants the sapling to become a tree, but the sapling doesn't 
see itself as separate from life and so wants nothing for itself. It is one with 
what Life wants. That's why it isn't worried or stressed. And if it has to die 
prematurely, it dies with ease. It is as surrendered in death as it is in life. It 
senses, no matter how obscurely, its rootedness in Being, the formless and 
eternal one Life.
Like   the   Taoist   sages   of   ancient   China,   Jesus   likes   to   draw   your 
attention to nature because he sees a power at work in it that humans have 
lost touch with. It is the creative power of the universe. Jesus goes on to say 
that if God clothes simple flowers in such beauty, how much more will God 
clothe you. That is to say, that while nature is a beautiful expression of the 
evolutionary impulse of the universe, when humans become aligned with the 
intelligence that underlies it, they will express that same impulse on a higher, 
more wondrous level.
So be true to life by being true to your inner purpose. As you become 
present and thereby total in what you do, your actions become charged with 
spiritual power. At first there may be no noticeable change in what you do – 
only the how changes. your primary purpose is now to enable consciousness 
to flow into what you do. The secondary purpose is whatever you want to 
achieve through the doing. Whereas the notion of purpose before was always 
associated with future, there is now a deeper purpose hat can only be found 
in the present, through the denial of time.
When you meet with people, at work or wherever it my be,  give them 
your fullest attention. You are no longer there primarily as a person, but as a 
field of awareness, of alert Presence. The original reason for interacting with 
the   other   person   –   buying   or   selling   something,   requesting   or   giving 
information, and so on – now becomes secondary. The field of awareness 
that arises between you becomes the primary purpose for the interaction. 
That space of awareness becomes more important than what you may be 
talking about, more important than physical or thought objects. The human 
Being  becomes more important than the things of this world. It does not 
mean you neglect whatever needs to be done on a practical level. In fact, the 
doing unfolds no only more easily, but more powerfully when the dimension 
of   Being   is   acknowledged   and   so   becomes   primary.   The   arising   of   that 
unifying   field   of   awareness   between   human   beings   is   the   most   essential 
factor in relationships on the new earth.
Is the notion of success just an egoic illusion? How do we measure  
true success?
The world will tell you that success is achieving what you set out to 
do. It will tell you that success is winning, that finding recognition and/or 
prosperity are essential ingredients in any success. All or some of the above 
are   usually   by­products   of   success,   but   they   are   not   success.   The 
conventional notion of success is concerned with the outcome of what you 
do. Some say that success is the result of a combination of hard work and 
luck, or determination and talent, or being in the right place at the right time. 
While any of these may be determinants of success, they are not its essence. 
What   the  world   doesn't   tell  you – because  it  doesn't  know  – is  that  you 
cannot become successful. You can only be successful. Don't let a mad world 
tell you that success is anything other than a successful present moment. 
And what is that? There is a sense of quality in what you do, even the most 
simple   action.   Quality   implies   care   and   attention,   which   comes   with 
awareness. Quality requires your Presence.
Let's say that you are a businessperson and after two years of intense 
stress and strain you finally manage to come out with a product or service 
that sells well and makes money. Success? In conventional terms, yes. In 
reality, you spent two years polluting your body as well as the earth with 
negative energy, made yourself and those around you miserable, and affected 
many others you never even met. The unconscious assumption behind all 
such action is that success is a future event, and that the need justifies the 
means.   But   the   end   and   he   means   are   one.   And   if   the   means   did   not 
contribute to human happiness, neither will the end. The outcome, which is 
inseparable from the actions that led to it, is already contaminated by those 
actions and so will create further unhappiness. This is karmic action, which 
is the unconscious perpetuation of unhappiness.
As you already know, your secondary or outer purpose lies within the 
dimension of time, while your main purpose is inseparable from the Now 
and therefore requires the negation of time. How are they reconciled? By 
realizing that your entire life journey ultimately consists of the step you are 
taking at this moment. There is always only this one step, an so you give it 
your   fullest   attention.   This   doesn't   mean   you   don't   know   where   you   are 
going; it just means this step is primary, the destination secondary. And what 
you encounter at your destination once you get there depends on the quality 
of this one step. Another way of putting it: What the future holds for you 
depends on your state of consciousness now.
When doing becomes infused with the timeless quality of Being, that 
is  success. Unless Being flows into doing, unless you are present, you lose 
yourself in whatever you do. You also lose yourself in thinking, as well as in 
your reactions to what happens externally.
What exactly do you mean when you say, “You lose yourself”?
The essence of who you are is consciousness. When consciousness 
(you)   becomes   completely   identified   with   thinking   and   thus   forgets   its 
essential nature, it loses itself in thought. When it becomes identified with 
mental­emotional   formations   such   as   wanting   and   fearing   –   the   primary 
motivating   forces   of   the   ego   –   it   loses   itself   in   those   formations. 
Consciousness also loses itself when it identifies with acting and reacting to 
what happens. Every thought, every desire or fear, every action or reaction, 
is then infused with a false sense of self that is incapable of sensing the 
simple  joy  of Being  and  so seeks pleasure, and sometimes even pain, as 
substitutes   for   it.   This   is   living  in   forgetfulness   of   Bing.  In  that   state   of 
forgetfulness   of   who   you   are,   every   success   is   no   more   than   a   passing 
delusion. Whatever you achieve, soon you will be unhappy again, or some 
new problem or dilemma will draw your attention in completely.
How do I go from realizing what my inner purpose is to finding out  
what I am supposed to do on the outer level?
The outer purpose varies greatly form person to person, and no outer 
purpose lasts forever. It is subject to time and then replaced by some other 
purpose. The extent to which dedication to the inner purpose of awakening 
changes the external circumstances of your life also varies greatly. For some 
people, there is a sudden or gradual break with their past: their work, living 
situation, relationship – everything undergoes profound change. Some of the 
change may be initiated by themselves, not through an agonizing decision­
making process but by a sudden realization or recognition: This is what I 
have to do. The decision arrives ready­made, so to speak. It comes through 
awareness, not through thinking. You wake up one morning and you know 
what to do. Some people find themselves walking out of an insane work 
environment or living situation. So before you discover what is right for you 
on the external level, before you discover what works, what is compatible 
with the awakening consciousness, you may have to find out what is not 
right, what no longer works, what is incompatible with your inner purpose.
Other kinds of change may suddenly come to you from without. A 
chance  meeting   brings   new  opportunity and expansion into your  life.   A 
long­standing obstacle or conflict dissolves. Your friends either go through 
this   inner   transformation   with   you   or   drift   out   of   your   life.   Some 
relationships dissolve, others deepen. You may get laid off from your job, or 
you become an agent for positive change at your workplace. Your spouse 
leaves you, or you reach a new level of intimacy. Some changes may look 
negative on the surface but you will soon realize that space is being created 
in your life for something new to emerge.
There may be a period of insecurity and uncertainty. What should I 
do? As the ego is no longer running your life, the psychological need for 
external security, which is illusory anyway, lessens. You are able to live with 
uncertainty, even enjoy it. When you become comfortable with uncertainty, 
infinite   possibilities   open   up   in   your   life.   It   means   fear   is   no   longer   a 
dominant   factor  in   what  you do and no longer prevents you from taking 
action to initiate change. The Roman philosopher Tacitus rightly observed 
that “the desire for safety stands against every great and noble enterprise.” If 
uncertainty   is   unacceptable   to   you,   it   turns   into   fear.   If   it   is   perfectly 
acceptable, it turns into increased aliveness, alertness, and creativity.
Many years ago, as a result of a strong inner impulse, I walked out of 
an academic career that the world would have called “promising,” stepping 
into complete uncertainty; and out of that, after several years, emerged my 
new   incarnation   as   a   spiritual   teacher.   Much   later,   something   similar 
happened  again.  The impulse came to give up my home in England and 
move to the West Coast of North America. I obeyed that impulse, although I 
didn't know the reason for it. Out of that move into uncertainty came  The 
Power of Now, most of which was written in California and British Columbia 
while I didn't have a home of my own. I had virtually no income and lived on 
my savings, which were quickly running out. In fact, everything fell into 
place beautifully. I ran out of money just when I as getting close to finishing 
writing. I bought a lottery ticket and won $1,000, which kept me going for 
another month.
Not everybody, whoever, will have to go through drastic change in 
their   external   circumstances.   At   the   other   end   of   the   spectrum   you   have 
people who stay exactly where they are and keep doing whatever they are 
doing. For them, only the how changes, not the what. This is not due to fear 
or inertia. What they are doing already is a perfect vehicle for consciousness 
to   come   into   this   world,   and   it   needs   no   other.   They   too   bring   into 
manifestation the new earth.
Shouldn't   this   be   the   case   for   everybody?   If   fulfilling   your   inner  
purpose is being at one with the present moment, why should anybody feel  
the need to remove themselves from their current work or living situation? 
Being at one with what is doesn't mean you no longer initiate change 
or   become   incapable   of   taking   action.   But   the   motivation   to   take   action 
comes   from   a   deeper   level,   not   from   egoic   wanting   or   fearing.   Inner 
alignment with the present moment opens your consciousness and brings it 
into alignment with the whole, of which the present moment is an integral 
part. The hole, the totality of life, then acts through you.
What do you mean by the whole?
On the one hand, the whole comprises all that exists. It is the world or 
the cosmos. But all things in existence, from microbes to human beings to 
galaxies, are not really separate things or entities, but form part of a web of 
interconnected multidimensional processes.
There are two reasons why we don't see this unity, why we see things 
as separate. One is perception, which reduces reality to what is accessible to 
us through the small range of our senses: what we can see, hear, smell, taste, 
and touch. But when we perceive without interpreting or mental labeling, 
which means without adding thought to our perceptions, we can actually still 
sense   the   deeper   connectedness   underneath   our   perception   of   seemingly 
separate things.
The   other   more   serious   reason   for   the   illusion   of   separateness   is 
compulsive   thinking.   It   is   when   we   are   trapped   in   incessant   streams   of 
compulsive thinking that the universe really disintegrates for us, and we lose 
the ability to sense the interconnectedness of all that exists. Thinking cuts 
reality   up   into   lifeless   fragments.   Extremely   unintelligent   and   destructive 
action arises out of such a fragmented view of reality.
However,   there   is   an   even   deeper   level   to   the   hole   than   the 
interconnectedness of everything in existence. At that deeper level, all things 
are   one.   it   is   the   Source,   the   unmanifested   one   Life.   It   is   the   timeless 
intelligence that manifests as a universe unfolding in time.
The whole is made up of existence and Being, the manifested and the 
unmanifested, the world and God. So when you become aligned with the 
whole, you become a conscious part of the interconnectedness of the whole 
and its purpose: the emergence of consciousness into this world. As a result, 
spontaneous   helpful   occurrences,   chance   encounters,   coincidences,   and 
synchronistic   events   happen   much   more   frequently.   Carl   Jung   called 
synchronicity   an   “acausal   connecting   principle.”   This   means   there   is   no 
causal   connection   between   synchronistic   events   on   our   surface   level   of 
reality. It is an outer manifestation of an underlying intelligence behind the 
world   of   appearances   and   a   deeper   connectedness   that   our   mind   cannot 
understand. But we can be conscious participants in the unfolding of that 
intelligence, the flowering consciousness.
Nature exists in a state of unconscious oneness with the whole. This, for 
example,  is  why no  virtually no wild animals were killed in the tsunami 
disaster of 2004. Being more in touch with the totality than humans, they 
could sense the tsunami's approach long before it could be seen or heard and 
so had time to withdraw to higher terrain. Perhaps even that is looking at it 
from a human perspective. They probably just found themselves moving to 
higher terrain. Doing  this  because of  that  is the mind's way of cutting up 
reality; whereas nature lies in unconscious oneness with the whole. It is our 
purpose and destiny to bring a new dimension into this world by living in 
conscious oneness with the totality and conscious alignment with universal 
intelligence. 
Can the whole use the human mind to create things or bring about  
situations that are in alignment with its purpose?
Yes, whenever there is inspiration, which translates as “in spirit,” and 
enthusiasm, which means “In God,” there is a creative empowerment hat 
goes far beyond what a mere person is capable of.

CHAPTER TEN
A NEW EARTH
Astronomers have discovered evidence to suggest that the universe came into 
existence   fifteen   billion   years   ago   in   a   gigantic   explosion   and   has   been 
expanding ever since. Not only has it been expanding, but it is also growing 
in complexity and becoming more and more differentiated. Some scientists 
also postulate that this movement from unity to multiplicity will eventually 
become   reversed.   The   universe   will   then   stop   expanding   and   begin   to 
contract   again   and   finally   return   to   the   unmanifested,   the   inconceivable 
nothingness out of which it came – and perhaps repeat the cycles of birth, 
expansion, contraction, and death again and again. For what purpose? “Why 
does the universe go to all the bother of existing?” asks physicist Stephen 
Hawking, realizing at the same time that no mathematical model could ever 
supply the answer.
If you look within rather than only without, however, you discover that 
you have an inner and an outer purpose, and since you are a microcosmic 
reflection of the macrocosm, it follows that the universe too has an inner and 
outer purpose inseparable from yours. The outer purpose of the universe is to 
create form and experience the interaction of forms – the play, the dream, the 
drama, or whatever you choose to call it. Its inner purpose is to awaken to its 
formless essence. Then comes the reconciliation of outer and inner purpose: 
to bring that essence – consciousness – into the world of form and thereby 
transform the world. The ultimate purpose of that transformation goes far 
beyond anything the human mind can imagine or comprehend. And yet, on 
this planet at this time, that transformation is the task allotted us. That is the 
reconciliation of outer and inner purpose, the reconciliation of the world and 
God.
Before we look at what relevance the expansion and contraction of the 
universe has to your own life, we need to bear in mind here that nothing we 
say about the nature of the universe should be taken as an absolute truth. 
Neither   concepts   nor   mathematical   formulae   can   explain   the   infinite.   No 
thought   can   encapsulate   the   vastness   of   the   totality.   Reality   is   a   unified 
whole, but thought cuts it up into fragments. This gives rise to fundamental 
misperceptions., for example, that there are separate things and events, or 
that this is the cause of that. Every thought implies a perspective, and every 
perspective, by its very nature, implies limitation, which ultimately means 
that it is not true, at least not absolutely. Only the whole is true, but the 
whole cannot be spoken or thought. Seen from beyond the limitations of 
thinking and therefore incomprehensible to the human mind, everything is 
happening now. All that ever has been or will be is now, outside of time, 
which is a mental construct. 
As an illustration of relative and absolute truth, consider the sunrise 
and sunset. when we say the sun rises in the morning and sets in the evening, 
that is true but only relatively. In absolute terms, it is false. Only from the 
limited perspective of an observer on or near the planet's surface does the 
sun rise and set. If you were far out in space, you would see that the sun 
neither rises nor sets, but that it shines continuously. And yet, even after 
realizing that, we can continue to speak of the sunrise or sunset, still see its 
beauty paint it, write poems about it, even though we now know that it is a 
relative rather than an absolute truth.
So let us continue to speak for a moment of another relative truth: the 
coming   into   form   of   the   universe   and   its   return   to   the   formless,   which 
implies the limited perspective of time, and see what relevance this has to 
your own life. The notion of “my own life” is, of course, another limited 
perspective created by thought, another relative truth. There is ultimately no 
such thing as “your” life, since you and life are not two, but one.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF YOUR LIFE
The coming into manifestation of the world as well as its return to the 
unmanifested – its expansion and contraction – are two universal movements 
that we could call the outgoing and the return home. Those two movements 
are reflected through the universe in many ways, such as in the incessant 
expansion and contraction of your heart, as well as in the inhalation and 
exhalation of your breath. They are also reflected in the cycles of sleep and 
wakefulness. Each night, without knowing it, you return to the unmanifested 
Source of all life when you enter the stage of deep, dreamless sleep, and then 
reemerge again in the morning, replenished.
Those two movements, the outgoing and the return are also reflected 
in each person's life cycles. Out of nowhere, so to speak, “you” suddenly 
appear   in   this   world.   Birth   is   followed   by   expansion.   There   is   not   only 
physical   growth,   but   also   growth   of   knowledge,   activities,   possessions, 
experiences. Your sphere of influence expands and life becomes increasingly 
complex.  This is a  time when you are mainly concerned with finding or 
pursuing your outer purpose. Usually there is also a corresponding growth of 
the ego, which is identification with all the above things, and so your form 
identity becomes more and more defined. This is also the time when outer 
purpose – growth – tends to become usurped by the ego, which unlike nature 
does not know when to stop in its pursuit of expansion and has a voracious 
appetite for more.
And then just when you thought you made it or that you belong here, 
the   return   movement   begins.   Perhaps   people   close   to   you   begin   to   die, 
people who were a part of your world. Then your physical form weakens; 
your   sphere   of   influence   shrinks.   Instead   of   becoming   more,   you   now 
become less, and the ego reacts to this with increasing anxiety or depression. 
Your world is beginning to contract, ad you may find you are not in control 
anymore.   Instead   of   acting   upon   life,   life   now   acts   upon   you   by   slowly 
reducing  your  world. The  consciousness that identified with form is now 
experiencing the sunset, the dissolution of form. And then one day, you too 
disappear. Your armchair is still there. But instead of you sitting in it, there is 
just an empty space. You went back to where you came from just a few years 
ago.
Each   person's  life  –   each life­form, in fact  – represents a world, a 
unique way in which the universe experiences itself. And when your form 
dissolves, a world comes to an end – one of countless worlds.
AWAKENING AND THE RETURN MOVEMENT
The return movement in a person's life, the weakening or dissolution 
of form, whether through old age, illness, disability, loss, or some kind of 
personal tragedy, carries great potential for spiritual awakening – the dis­
identification of consciousness from form. Since there is very little spiritual 
truth   in   our  contemporary   culture, not  many  people recognize this  as  an 
opportunity, and so when it happens to them or to someone close to them, 
they think there is something dreadfully wrong, something that should not be 
happening. 
There is in our civilization a great deal of ignorance about the human 
condition, and the more spiritually ignorant you are, the more you suffer. For 
many people, particularly in the West, death is no more than an abstract 
concept, and so they have no idea what happens to the human form when it 
approaches   dissolution.   Most   decrepit   and   old   people   are   shut   away   in 
nursing   homes.   Dead   bodies,   which   in   some   older   cultures   are   on   open 
display for all to see , are hidden away. Try to see a dead body, and you will 
find   that   it   is   virtually   illegal,   except   if   the   deceased   is   a   close   family 
member. In funeral homes, they even apply makeup to the face. You are only 
allowed to see a sanitized version of death.
Since   death   is   only   an   abstract   concept   to   them,   most   people   are 
totally   unprepared   for   the   dissolution   of   form   that   awaits   them.   when   it 
approaches,   there   is   shock,   incomprehension,   despair,   and   great   fear. 
Nothing makes sense anymore, because all the meaning and purpose that life 
had   for   them   was   associated   with   accumulating,   succeeding,   building, 
protecting,   and   sense   gratification.   It   was   associated   with   the   outward 
movement   and   identification   with   form,   that   is   to   say,   ego.   Most   people 
cannot   conceive   of   any   meaning   when   their   life,   their   world,   is   being 
demolished. And yet, potentially, there is even deeper meaning here than in 
the outward movement.
It is precisely though the onset of old age, through loss or personal 
tragedy, that the spiritual dimension would traditionally come into people's 
lives. This is to say, their inner purpose would emerge only as their outer 
purpose collapsed and the shell of the ego would begin to crack open. Such 
events represent the beginning of the return movement toward the dissolution 
of   form.   In   most   ancient   cultures,   there   must   have   been   an   intuitive 
understanding of this process, which is why old people were respected and 
revered. They were the repositories of wisdom and provided the dimension 
of   depth   without   which   no   civilization   can   survive   for   long.   In   our 
civilization, which is totally identified with the outer and ignorant of the 
inner dimension of spirit, the word old has mainly negative connotations. It 
equals useless and so we regard it as almost an insult to refer to someone as 
old. To avoid the word, we use euphemisms such as elderly and senior. The 
First Nation's “grandmother” is a figure of great dignity. Today's “granny” is 
at   best   cute.   Why   is   old   considered   useless?   Because   in   old   age,   the 
emphasis shifts from doing to Being, and our civilization, which is lost in 
doing, knows nothing of Being. It asks: being? What do you do with it?
In some people, the outward movement of growth and expansion gets 
severely disrupted by a seemingly premature onset of the return movement, 
the dissolving of form. In some cases, it is a temporary disruption; in others 
a permanent  one.  We  believe that a young child should not have to face 
death, but the fact is that some children do have to face the death of one or 
both parents through illness or accident – or even the possibility of their own 
death.   Some   children   are   born   with   disabilities   that   severely   restrict   the 
natural   expansion   of   their   lives.   Or   some   severe   limitation   comes   into   a 
person's life at a relatively young age.
The disruption of the outward movement at a time when it is “not 
meant to be happening” can also potentially bring forth an early spiritual 
awakening   n   a   person.   Ultimately,   nothing   happens   that   is   not   meant   to 
happen, which  is  to say,  nothing happens   that is not part of the greater 
whole and its purpose. Thus, destruction  or disruption of outer purpose can 
lead to finding your inner purpose and subsequently the arising of a deeper 
outer  purpose  that   is  aligned with the inner. Children who have suffered 
greatly often grow into young adults who are mature beyond their years.
What is lost on the level of form is gained on the level of essence. In 
the traditional figure of the “blind seer” or the “wounded healer” of ancient 
cultures and legend, some great loss or disability on the level of form has 
become an opening into spirit. When you have had a direct experience of the 
unstable nature of all forms, you will likely never overvalue form again and 
thus lose yourself by blindly pursuing it or attaching yourself to it.
The opportunity that the dissolution of form, and in particular, old 
age, represents is only just beginning to be recognized in our contemporary 
culture. In the majority of people, that opportunity is stile tragically missed, 
because the ego identifies with the return movement just as it identified with 
the   outward   movement.   This   results   in   a   hardening   of   the   egoic   shell,   a 
contraction rather than an opening. The diminished ego then spends the rest 
of its days whining or complaining , trapped in fear or anger, self­pity, guilt, 
blame,   or   other   negative   mental­emotional   states   or   avoidance   strategies, 
such as attachment to memories and thinking and talking about the past.
When the ego is no longer identified with the return movement in a 
person's life, old age or approaching death becomes what it is meant to be: 
an opening into the realm of spirit. I have met old people who were living 
embodiments of this process. They had become radiant. Their weakening 
forms had become transparent to the light of consciousness.
On the new earth, old age will be universally recognized and highly 
valued as a time for the flowering of consciousness. For those who are still 
lost   in   the   outer   circumstances   of   their   lies,   it   will   be   a   time   of   a   late 
homecoming when they awaken to their inner purpose. For many others, it 
will represent an intensification and a culmination of the awakening process.
AWAKENING AND THE OUTGOING MOVEMENT
The   natural   expansion   of   one's   life   that   comes   with   the   outward 
movement has traditionally been usurped by the ego and used for its own 
expansion. “Look what I can do. I bet you can't do that,”says the small child 
to another as he discovers the increasing strength and abilities of his body. 
That is one of the ego's first attempts to enhance itself through identification 
with   the   outward   movement  and  the  concept  of  “more  than  you”  and  to 
strengthen itself by diminishing others. It is, of course, only the beginning of 
the ego's many misperceptions.
However, as your awareness increases and the ego is no longer running 
your life, you don't have to wait for your world to shrink or collapse trough 
old age or personal tragedy in order for you to awaken to your inner purpose. 
As the new consciousness is beginning to emerge on the planet an 
increasing   number   of   people   no   longer   need   to   be   shaken   to   have   an 
awakening. They embrace the awakening process voluntarily even while still 
engaged in the outward cycle of growth and expansion. When that cycle is 
no longer usurped by the ego, the spiritual dimension will come into this 
world through the outward movement – thought, speech, action, creation – as 
powerfully   as   through   the   return   movement   –   stillness,   Being,   and 
dissolution of form.
Until now, human intelligence, which is no more than a minute aspect 
of universal intelligence, has been distorted and misused by the ego. I call 
that “intelligence n the service of madness.” Splitting the atom requires great 
intelligence. Using that intelligence for building and stockpiling atom bombs 
is insane or at best extremely unintelligent. Stupidity is relatively harmless, 
but intelligent stupidity is highly dangerous. This intelligent stupidity, for 
which one could find countless obvious examples, is threatening our survival 
as a species.
Without he impairment of egoic dysfunction, our intelligence comes 
into full alignment with the outgoing cycle of universal intelligence and its 
impulse to create. We become conscious participants in the creation of form. 
It is not we who create, but universal intelligence that creates through us. We 
don't identify with what we create and so don't lose ourselves in what we do. 
We are learning that the act of creation may involve energy of the highest 
intensity, but that is not “hard work” or stressful. We need to understand the 
difference between stress and intensity, as we shall see. Struggle or stress is a 
sign that he ego has returned, as are negative reactions when we encounter 
obstacles.
The force behind the ego's wanting creates “enemies,” that is to say, 
reaction in the form of an opposing force equal in intensity. The stronger the 
ego, the stronger the sense of separateness between people. The only actions 
that do not cause opposing reactions are those that are aimed at the good of 
all. They are inclusive, not exclusive. They join; they don't separate. They are 
not for “my” country but for all of humanity, not for “my” religion but the 
emergence of consciousness in all human beings, not for “my” species but 
for all sentient beings and all of nature.
We   are   also   learning   that   action,   although   necessary,   is   only   a 
secondary factor in manifesting our external reality. The primary factor in 
creation is consciousness. No matter how active we are, how much effort we 
make, our state of consciousness creates our world, and if there is no change 
on that inner level, no amount of action will make any difference. We would 
only re­create modified versions of the same world again and again, a world 
that is an external reflection of the ego.
CONSCIOUSNESS
Consciousness is already conscious. It is the unmanifested, the eternal. 
the universe, however, is only gradually becoming conscious. Consciousness 
itself is timeless and therefore does not evolve. It was never born and does 
not die. When consciousness becomes the manifested universe, it appears to 
be subject to time and to undergo an evolutionary process. No human mind 
is capable of comprehending fully the reason for this process. But we can 
glimpse it within ourselves and become a conscious participant in it.
Consciousness is the intelligence, the organizing principle behind the 
arising   of   form.   Consciousness  has   been  preparing  forms   for   millions   of 
years so that it can express itself through them in the manifested.
Although   the   unmanifested   realm   of   pure   consciousness   could   be 
considered another dimension, it is not separate from this dimension of form. 
Form   and   formlessness   interpenetrate.   the   unmanifested   flows   into   this 
dimension   as   awareness,   inner   space,   presence.   How   does   it   do   that? 
Through the human form that becomes conscious and thus fulfills its destiny. 
The human form was created for this higher purpose, and millions of other 
forms prepared the ground for it.
Consciousness incarnates into the manifested dimension, that is to say, 
it becomes form. When it does so, it enters a dreamlike state. Intelligence 
dreams, but consciousness becomes unconscious of itself. It loses itself in 
form, becomes identified with form. This could be describe as the descent of 
the divine into matter. At that stage in the evolution of the universe, the 
entire outgoing movement takes place in that dreamlike state. Glimpses of 
awakening   come   only   at   the   moment   of   the   dissolution   of   an   individual 
form, that is to say, death. And then begins the next incarnation, the next 
identification   with   form,   the   next   individual   dream   that   is   part   of   the 
collective   dream.   When   the   lion   tears   apart   the   body   of   the   zebra,   the 
consciousness that incarnated into the zebra­form detaches itself from the 
dissolving form and for a brief moment awakens to its essential immortal 
nature   as   consciousness;   and   then   immediately   falls   back   into   sleep   and 
reincarnates into another form. When the lion becomes old and cannot hunt 
anymore, as it draws its last breath, there is again the briefest of glimpses of 
an awakening, followed by another dream of form.
On our planet, the human ego represents the final stage of universal 
sleep, the identification of consciousness with form. It was a necessary stage 
in the evolution of consciousness.
The   human   brain   is   a   highly   differentiated   form   through   which 
consciousness enters this dimension. It contains approximately one hundred 
billion nerve cells (called neurons), about the same number as there are stars 
in our galaxy, which could be seen as a macrocosmic brain. The brain does 
not   create   consciousness,   but   consciousness   created   the   brain,   the   most 
complex   physical   form   on   earth,   for   its   expression.   When   the   brain   gets 
damaged, it does not mean you lose consciousness. It means consciousness 
can   no   longer   use   that   form   to   enter   this   dimension.   You   cannot   lose 
consciousness   because  it   is,  in  essence,  who you are. You  can  only  lose 
something that you have, but you cannot lose something that you are.
AWAKENED DOING
Awakened doing is the outer aspect of the next stage in the evolution 
of consciousness on our planet. The closer we get to the end of our present 
evolutionary stage, the more dysfunctional the ego becomes, in the same way 
that   a   caterpillar   becomes   dysfunctional   just   before   it   transforms   into   a 
butterfly. But the new consciousness is arising even as the old dissolves. 
We are in the midst of a momentous event in the evolution of human 
consciousness, but they won't be talking about it in the news tonight. On our 
planet, and perhaps simultaneously in many parts of our galaxy and beyond, 
consciousness is awakening from the dream of form. This does not mean all 
forms (the world) are going to dissolve, although quite a few almost certainly 
will. It means consciousness can now begin to create form without losing 
itself   in   it.   It   can   remain   conscious   of   itself,   even   while   it   creates   and 
experiences form. Why should it continue to create and experience form? 
For   the   enjoyment   of   it.   How   does   consciousness   do   that?   Through 
awakened humans who have learned the meaning of awakened doing.
Awakened doing is the alignment of your outer purpose­ what you do 
–   with   your   inner   purpose   –   awakening   and   staying   awake.   Through 
awakened doing, you become one with the outgoing purpose of the universe. 
Consciousness flows through you into this world. It flows into your thoughts 
and inspires them. It flows into what you do and guides and empowers it.
Not  what  you do, but how you do what you do determines whether 
you are fulfilling your destiny. And how you do what you do is determined 
by your state of consciousness.
A reversal of your priorities comes about when the main purpose for 
doing   what   you   do   becomes   the   doing   itself,   or   rather,   the   current   of 
consciousness that flows into what you do. That current of consciousness is 
what determines quality. Another way of putting it: In any situation and in 
whatever   you   do,   your   state   of   consciousness   is   the   primary   factor;   the 
situation and what you do is secondary. “Future” success is dependent upon 
and inseparable from the consciousness out of which the actions emanate. 
That   can   be  either   the  reactive force of the ego or  the alert  attention of 
awakened consciousness. All truly successful action comes out of that field 
of   alert   attention,   rather   than   from   ego   and   conditioned,   unconscious 
thinking.
THE THREE MODALITIES OF AWAKENED DOING
There are three ways in which consciousness can flow into what you 
do and thus through you into this world, three modalities in which you can 
align your life with the creative power of the universe. Modality means the 
underlying energy­frequency that flows into what you do and connects your 
actions with the awakened consciousness hat is emerging into this world. 
What you do will be dysfunctional and of the ego unless it arises out of one 
of   these   three   modalities.   They   may   change   during   the   course   of   a   day, 
although one of them may be dominant during a certain stage in your life. 
Each modality is appropriate to certain situations.
The   modalities   of   awakened   doing   are   acceptance,   enjoyment,   and 
enthusiasm.   Each   one   represents   a   certain   vibrational   frequency   of 
consciousness.   You   need   to   be   vigilant   to   make   sure   that   one   of   them 
operates whenever you are engaged in doing anything at all – from the most 
simple   task   to   the   most   complex.   If   you   are   not   in   the   state   of   either 
acceptance, enjoyment, or enthusiasm, look closely and you will find that 
you are creating suffering for yourself and others.
ACCEPTANCE
Whatever you cannot enjoy doing, you can at least accept that this is 
what you have to do. Acceptance means: For now, this is what this situation, 
this moment, requires me to do, and so I do it willingly. We already spoke at 
length   about   the   importance   of   inner   acceptance   of   what  happens,  and 
acceptance of what you have to do is just another aspect of it. For example, 
you probably won't be able to enjoy changing the flat tire on your car at night 
in the middle of nowhere and in pouring rain, let alone be enthusiastic about 
it, but you can bring acceptance to it. Performing an action in the state of 
acceptance means you are at peace while you do it. That peace is a subtle 
energy   vibration   which   then   flows   into   what   you   do.   On   the   surface, 
acceptance looks like a passive state, but in reality it is active and creative 
because it brings something entirely new into this world. That peace, that 
subtle energy vibration, is consciousness, and one of the ways in which ti 
enters   this   world   is   through   surrendered   action,   one   aspect   of   which   is 
acceptance.
If you can neither enjoy or bring acceptance to what you do – stop. 
Otherwise, you are not taking responsibility for the only thing you can really 
take   responsibility   for,   which   also   happens   to   be   one   thing   that   really 
matters: your state of consciousness. And if you are not taking responsibility 
for your state of consciousness, you are not taking responsibility for life.
ENJOYMENT
The   peace   that   comes   with   surrendered   action   turns   to   a   sense   of 
aliveness  when  you  actually  enjoy what you are doing. Enjoyment  is the 
second   modality   of   awakened   doing.   On   the   new   earth,   enjoyment   will 
replace wanting as the motivating power behind people's actions. Wanting 
arises   from   the   ego's   delusion   that   you   are   a   separate   fragment   that   is 
disconnected   from   the   power   that   lies   behind   all   creation.   Through 
enjoyment, you link into that universal creative power itself.
When you make the present moment, instead of past and future, the 
focal point of your life, your ability to enjoy what you do – and with it the 
quality of your life – increases dramatically. Joy is the dynamic aspect of 
Being. When the creative power of the universe becomes conscious of itself, 
it manifests as joy. You don't have to wait for something “meaningful” to 
come into your life so that you can finally enjoy what you do. There is more 
meaning   in   joy   than   you   will   ever   need.   The   “waiting   to   start   living” 
syndrome is one of the most common delusions of the unconscious state. 
Expansion and positive change on the outer level is much more likely to 
come into your life if you  can enjoy what you are doing already, instead of 
waiting for some change so that you can start enjoying what you do.
Don't ask your mind for permission to enjoy what you do. All you will 
get is plenty of reasons why you can't enjoy it. “Not now,” the mind will say. 
“Can't you see I'm busy? There's no time. Maybe tomorrow you can start 
enjoying....” That tomorrow will never come unless you begin enjoying what 
you are doing now.
When you say, I enjoy doing this or that, it is really a misperception. It 
makes it appear that the joy comes from what you do, but that is not the case. 
Joy does not come from what you do, it flows into what you do and thus into 
this world from deep within you. The misperception that joy comes from 
what you do is normal, and it is also dangerous, because it creates the belief 
that joy is something that can be derived form something else, such as an 
activity or thing. You then look to the world to bring you joy, happiness. But 
it cannot do that. This is why many people live in constant frustration. The 
world is not giving them what they think they need.
Then what is the relationship between something that you do and the 
state of joy? You will enjoy any activity in which you are fully present, any 
activity that is not just a means to an end. It isn't the action you perform that 
you   really   enjoy,   but   the  deep sense  of aliveness  that  flows into it. That 
aliveness is one with who you are. This means that when you enjoy doing 
something,   you   are   really   experiencing   the   joy   of   Being   in   its   dynamic 
aspect. That's why anything you enjoy doing connects you with the power 
behind all creation.
Here is a spiritual practice that will bring empowerment and creative 
expansion   into   your   life.   Make   a   list   of   a   number   of   everyday   routine 
activities   that   you   perform   frequently.   Include   activities   hat   you   may 
consider   uninteresting,   boring,   tedious,   irritating,   or   stressful.   But   don't 
include   anything   that   you   hate   or   detest   doing.   That's   a   case   either   for 
acceptance or for stopping what you do. The list may include traveling to and 
from work, buying groceries, doing your laundry, or anything that you find 
tedious or stressful in your daily work. Then, whenever you are engaged in 
those activities, let hem be a vehicle for alertness. Be absolutely present in 
what you do and sense the alert, alive stillness within you in the background 
of   the   activity.   You   will   soon   find   that   what   you   do   in   such   a   state   of 
heightened   awareness,   instead   of   being   stressful,   tedious,   or   irritating,   is 
actually becoming enjoyable. To be more precise, what you are enjoying is 
not really the outward action but the inner dimension of consciousness hat 
flows into the action. This is finding the joy of Being in what you are doing. 
If you feel your life lacks significance or is too stressful or tedious, it is 
because   you   haven't   brought   that   dimension   into   your   life   yet.   Being 
conscious in what you do has not yet become your main aim. 
The new earth arises as more and more people discover that their main 
purpose in life is to bring the light of consciousness into this world and so 
use whatever they do as a vehicle for consciousness.
The joy of Being is the joy of being conscious.
Awakened consciousness then takes over from ego and begins to run 
your life. You may then find that an activity that you have been engaged in 
for a long time naturally begins to expand into something much bigger when 
it becomes empowered by consciousness.
Some of those people who, through creative action, enrich the lives of 
many   others   simply   do   what   they   enjoy   doing   most   without   wanting   to 
achieve or become anything through that activity. They may be musicians, 
artists,   writers,   scientists,   teachers,   or   builders,   or   they   may   bring   into 
manifestation   new   social   or   business   structures   (enlightened   businesses). 
Sometimes for a few years their sphere of influence remains small; and then 
it can happen that suddenly or gradually a wave of creative empowerment 
flows into what they do, and their activity expands beyond anything they 
could have imagined and touches countless others. In addition to enjoyment, 
an intensity is now added to what they do and with it comes a creativity that 
goes beyond anything an ordinary human could accomplish.
But don't let it go to your head, because up there is where a remnant of 
ego may be hiding. You are still an ordinary human. What is extraordinary is 
what comes through you into this world. But that essence you share with all 
beings. The fourteenth­century Persian poet and Sufi master Hafiz expresses 
this truth beautifully: “I am a hole in a flute that the Christ's breath moves 
through. Listen to this music.” 1
ENTHUSIASM
Then there is another way of creative manifestation that may come to 
those who remain true to their inner purpose of awakening. Suddenly one 
day they know what their outer purpose is. They have a great vision, a goal, 
and from then on they work toward implementing that goal. Their goal or 
vision is usually connected in some way to something that on a smaller scale 
they are doing and enjoy doing already. This is where the third modality of 
awakened doing arises: enthusiasm.
Enthusiasm mans there is deep enjoyment in what you do plus the 
added element of a goal or a vision that you work toward. When you add a 
goal   to   the   enjoyment   of   what   you   do,   the   energy­field   or   vibrational 
frequency changes. A certain degree of what we might call structural tension 
is now added to enjoyment, and so it turns into enthusiasm. At the height of 
creative activity fueled by enthusiasm, there will be enormous intensity and 
energy behind what you do. You will feel like an arrow hat is moving toward 
the target – and enjoying the journey.
To   an   onlooker,   it   may   appear   that   you   are   under   stress,   but   the 
intensity of enthusiasm has nothing to do with stress. When you want to 
arrive at your goal more than you want to be doing what you are doing, you 
become stressed. The balance between enjoyment and structural tension is 
lost, and the latter has won. When there is stress, it is usually a sign that the 
ego has returned , and you are cutting yourself off form the creative power of 
the universe. Instead, there is only the force and strain of egoic wanting, and 
so you have to struggle and “work hard” to make it. Stress always diminishes 
both the quality and effectiveness of what you do under its influence. There 
is also a strong link between stress and negative emotions, such as anxiety 
and anger. It is toxic to the body and is now becoming recognized as one of 
the main causes of the so­called degenerative diseases such as cancer and 
heart disease.
Unlike   stress,   enthusiasm   has   a   high   energy   frequency   and   so 
resonates with the creative power of the universe. This is why Ralph Waldo 
Emerson   said   that,   “Nothing   great   has   ever   been   achieved   without 
enthusiasm.”2  The   word  enthusiasm  comes   from   ancient   Greek   –  en  and 
theos  meaning   God.   And   the   related   word  enthousiazein  means   “to   be 
possessed by a god.” With enthusiasm you will find that you don't have to do 
it all by yourself. In fact, there is nothing of significance that you can do by 
yourself.   Sustained   enthusiasm   brings   into   existence   a   wave   of   creative 
energy, and all you have to do then is “ride the wave.”
Enthusiasm brings an enormous empowerment into what you do, so 
that   all   those   who   have   not   accessed  that  power   would  look  upon  “your 
achievements in awe and may equate them with who you are. You, however, 
know the truth that Jesus pointed to when he said, “I can of my own self do 
nothing.”3  Unlike   egoic   wanting,   which   creates   opposition   indirect 
proportion to the intensity of its wanting, enthusiasm never opposes. It is 
non­confrontational.   Its   activity   does   not   create   winners   and   losers.   It   is 
based on inclusion, not exclusion, of others. It does not need to use and 
manipulate people, because it is the power of creation itself and so does not 
need to take energy from some secondary source. The ego's wanting always 
tries to take form something or someone; enthusiasm gives out of its own 
abundance. When enthusiasm encounters obstacles in the form of adverse 
situations or uncooperative people, it never attacks but walks around them or 
by yielding or embracing turns the opposing energy into a helpful one, the 
foe into a friend.
Enthusiasm and the ego cannot coexist. one implies the absence of the 
other. Enthusiasm knows where it is going, but at the same time, it is deeply 
at one with the present moment, the source of its aliveness, its joy, and its 
power. Enthusiasm “wants” nothing because it lacks nothing. It is at one 
with life and no matter how dynamic the enthusiasm­inspired activities are, 
you   don't   lose   yourself   in   them.   And   there   remains   always   a   still   but 
intensely alive space at the center of the wheel, a core of peace in the midst 
of activity that is both the source of all and untouched by it all.
Through enthusiasm you enter into full alignment with the outgoing 
creative principle of the universe, but without identifying with its creation, 
that   is   to   say,   without   ego.   where   there   is   no   identification,   there   is   no 
attachment – one of the great sources of suffering. Once a wave of creative 
energy has passed, structural tension diminishes again and joy in what you 
are doing remains. Nobody can live in enthusiasm all the time. A new wave 
of creative energy may come later and lead to renewed enthusiasm.
When   the  return   movement  toward the dissolution of form  sets  in, 
enthusiasm no longer serves you. Enthusiasm belongs to the outgoing cycle 
of life. It is only through surrender that you can align yourself with the return 
movement – the journey home.
To sum up: Enjoyment of what you are doing, combined with a goal or 
vision that you work toward, becomes enthusiasm. Even though you have a 
goal, what you are doing in the present moment needs to remain the focal 
point   of   your   attention;   otherwise,   you   will   fall   out   of   alignment   with 
universal purpose. Make sure your vision or goal is not an inflated image of 
yourself and therefore a concealed form of ego, such as wanting to become a 
movie star, a famous writer, or a wealthy entrepreneur. Also make sure your 
goal is not focused on having this or that, such as a mansion by the sea, your 
own   company,   or   ten   million   dollars   in   the   bank.   An   enlarged   image   of 
yourself or a vision of yourself  having  this or that are all static goals and 
therefore don't empower you. Instead, make sure your goals are dynamic, 
that is to say, point toward an activity  that you are engaged in and through 
which you are connected to other human beings as well as to the whole. 
Instead   of   seeing   yourself   as   a   famous   actor   and   writer   and   so   on,   see 
yourself inspiring countless people with your work and enriching their lives. 
Feel  how  that   activity  enriches or deepens not only your life but  that of 
countless others. Feel yourself being an opening through which energy flows 
form the unmanifested Source of all life through you for the benefit of all.
All this implies hat your goal or vision is then already a reality within 
you,   on   the   level   of   mind   and   of   feeling.   Enthusiasm   is   the   power   that 
transfers   the   mental   blueprint   into   the   physical   dimension.   That   is   the 
creative use of mind, and that is why here is no wanting involve. You cannot 
manifest what you want; you can only manifest what you already have. You 
may get what you want through hard work and stress, but that is not the way 
of the new earth. Jesus gave the key to the creative use of mind and to the 
conscious manifestation of form when he said, 'Whatever you ask in prayer, 
believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.”4
THE FREQUENCY­HOLDERS
The outward movement into form does not express itself with equal 
intensity   in   all   people.   Some  feel   a  strong  urge  to  build,  create,  become 
involved, achieve, make an impact upon the world. If they are unconscious, 
their ego will, of course, take over and use the energy of the outgoing cycle 
for its own purposes. This, however, also greatly reduces the flow of creative 
energy available to them and increasingly they need to rely on “efforting” to 
get what they want. If they are conscious, those people in whom the outward 
movement   is   strong   will   be   highly   creative.   Others,   after   the   natural 
expansion that comes with growing up has run its course, lead an outwardly 
unremarkable, seemingly more passive and relatively uneventful existence.
They are more inward looking by nature, and for them the outward 
movement into form is minimal. They would rather return home than go out. 
They have no desire to get strongly involved in or change the world. If they 
have any ambitions, they usually don't go beyond finding something to do 
that gives them a degree of independence. Some of them find it hard to fit 
into this world. Some are lucky enough to find a protective niche where they 
can lead a relatively sheltered life, a job that provides them with a regular 
income or a small business of their own. Some may feel drawn toward living 
in a spiritual community or monastery. Others may become dropouts and 
live on the margins of society they feel they have little in common with. 
Some turn to drugs because hey find living in this world too painful. Others 
eventually become healers or spiritual teachers, that is to say, teachers of 
Being.
In past ages, they would probably have been called contemplatives. 
There is no place for them, it seems, in our contemporary civilization. On 
the   arising   new   earth,   however,   their   role   is   just   as   vital   as   that   of   the 
creators, the doers, the reformers. Their function is to anchor the frequency 
of the new consciousness on his planet. I call them the frequency­holders. 
They are here to generate consciousness through the activities of daily life, 
through their interactions with others as well as through “just being.”
In   this   way,   they   endow  the  seemingly  insignificant  with  profound 
meaning. Their task is to bring spacious stillness into this world by being 
absolutely Present in whatever they do. There is consciousness and therefore 
quality   in   what   they   do,   even   the   simplest   task.   Their   purpose   is   to   do 
everything in a sacred manner. As each human being is an integral part of 
the collective human consciousness, they affect the world much more deeply 
than is visible on the surface of their lives.
THE NEW EARTH IS NO UTOPIA
Is the notion of a new earth not just another utopian vision? Not at all. 
All utopian visions have this in common: the mental projection of a future 
time   when   all   will   be   well,   we   will   be   saved,   there   will   be   peace   and 
harmony and the end of our problems. There have been many such utopian 
visions. Some ended in disappointment, others in disaster. 
At   the   core   of   all   utopian   visions   lies   one   of   the   main   structural 
dysfunctions of the old consciousness: looking to the future for salvation. 
The only existence the future actually has is as a thought form in your mind, 
so when you look to the future for salvation, you are unconsciously looking 
to your own mind for salvation. You are trapped in form, and that is ego.
“And   I   saw   a   new   heaven   and   a   new   earth,”5  writes   the   biblical 
prophet. the foundation for a new earth is a new heaven – the awakened 
consciousness. The earth – external reality – is only its outer reflection. The 
arising of a new heaven and by implication a new earth are not future events 
that are going to make us free. Nothing is going to make us free because only 
the present moment can make us free. That realization is the awakening. 
Awakening   as   a   future   event   has   no   meaning   because   awakening   is   the 
realization of Presence. So the new heaven , the awakened consciousness, is 
not a future state to be achieved. A new heaven and a new earth are arising 
within you at this moment, and if they are not arising at this moment, they 
are no more than a thought in your head and therefore not arising at all. 
What did Jesus tell his disciples? “Heaven is right here in the midst of you.”6 
In the Sermon on th Mount, Jesus makes a prediction that to this day 
few people have understood. He says, “Blessed are the meek, for they shall 
inherit the earth.”7 In modern versions of the Bible, “meek” is translated as 
humble. Who are the meek or the humble, and what does it mean that they 
shall inherit the earth?
The meek are the egoless. They are those who have awakened to their 
essential   true   nature   as   consciousness   and   recognize   that   essence   in   all 
“others,” all life­forms. They live in the surrendered state and so feel their 
oneness   with   the   whole   and   the   Source.   They   embody   the   awakened 
consciousness that is changing all aspects of life on our planet, including 
nature, because life on earth is inseparable from the human consciousness 
that perceives and interacts with it. That is the sense in which the meek will 
inherit the earth. 
A new species is arising on the planet. It is arising now, and you are it!
NOTES
CHAPTER ONE
1. Revelation 21:1 and Isaiah 65:17 (New Revised Standard Version)

CHAPTER TWO
1. Matthew 5:3 (New Revised Standard Version)
2. Philippians 4:7 (New Revised Standard Version)

CHAPTER THREE
1. Luke 6:41 (New Revised Standard Version)
2. John 14:6 (New Revised Standard Version)
3. Halevi, Yossie K.,  “Introspective as a Prerequisite for Peace,”  New 
York Times, September 7, 2002
4. U.S.   Department   of   Justice,   Bureau   of   Justice   Statistics,   Prison 
statistics, June, 2004
5. Einstein,   Albert,  Mein   Weltbild;  25th  Edition   (Frankfurt:   Ullstein 
Verlag, 1993), 42. Translation by Eckhart Tolle

CHAPTER FOUR
1. Shakespeare, William,  Macbeth:  Signet Classic Edition (New York: 
New American Library). Edited by Sylvan Barnet
2. Shakespeare,   William,  Hamlet.   Signet   Classic   Edition   (New   York: 
New American Library). Edited by Sylvan Barnet
CHAPTER SIX
1. Matthew 5:48 (New Revised Standard Version).

CHAPTER SEVEN
1. Luke 6:38 (New Revised Standard Version).
2. Mark 4:25 (New Revised Standard Version).
3. I Corinthians 3:19 (New Revised Standard Version).
4. Tzu, Lao, Tao Te Ching, chapter 28
5. Ibid, chapter 22
6. Luke 14:10­11 (New Revised Standard Version).
7. Kena Upanishad

CHAPTER EIGHT
1. Ecclesiasties 1:8 (New Revised Standard Version).
2.   A   Course   in   Miracles,  Workbook,   Part   I,   Lesson   5   (California: 
Foundation for Inner Peace, Glen Allen, 1990), 8.
3. Luke 17:20­21 (New Revised Standard Version).
4. Nietzsche, Friedriche,  Thus Spake Zarathustra: A Book for All and 
None (New York: Viking, 1954), 288
5. Genesis 2:7 (New Revised Standard Version).

CHAPTER NINE
1. John 5:30 and John 14:10 (New Revised Standard Version)
2. Matthew 6:28­29 (New Revised Standard Version)

CHAPTER TEN
1. Hafiz,  The Gift  (New York: Penguin, Arkana, 1999). Translated by 
Daniel Ladinsky
2. Emerson, Ralph Waldo, “Circles” in Ralph Waldo Emerson: Selected 
Essays, Lectures, and Poems (New York: Bantam Classics).
3. John 5:30 (New Revised Standard Version).
4. Mark 11:24 (New Revised Standard Version).
5. Revelation 21:1 (New Revised Standard Version).
6. Luke 17:21 (New Revised Standard Version).
7. Matthew 5:5 (New Revised Standard Version).
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Eckhart Tolle is a contemporary spiritual teacher who is not aligned with any 
particular religion or tradition. In his writing and seminars, he conveys a 
simple yet profound message with the timeless and uncomplicated clarity of 
the ancient spiritual masters: There is a way out of suffering and into peace. 
Tolle travels extensively, taking his teachings throughout the world. He lives 
in Vancouver, British Columbia.

Eckhart Tolle

Stillness Speaks
Introduction
A true spiritual teacher does not have anything to teach in the conventional sense of
the word, does not have anything to give or add to you, such as new information,
beliefs, or rules of conduct. The only function of such a teacher is to help you
remove that which separates you from the truth of who you already are and what
you already know in the depth of your being. The spiritual teacher is there to
uncover and reveal to you that dimension of the inner depth that is also peace.
If you come to a spiritual teacher or this book looking for stimulating ideas,
theories, beliefs, intellectual discussions, then you will be disappointed. In other
words, if you are looking for food for thought, you won't find it. And you will miss
the very essence of the teaching, the essence of this book which is not in the words
but within yourself. It is good to remember that, to feel that, as you listen.
The words are no more than signposts. That to which they point is not to be found
within the realm of thought but a dimension within yourself that is deeper, and
infinitely vaster than thought. A vibrantly alive peace is one of the characteristics
of that dimension. So whenever you feel inner peace arising as you listen, the book
is doing it work and fulfilling its function as your teacher. It is reminding you of
who you are and pointing the way back home.
This is not a book to be read from cover to cover and then put away. Live with it.
Pick it up frequently. And, more importantly, put it down frequently. Or spend
more time holding it than reading it. Many readers will feel naturally inclined to
stop reading after each entry, to pause, reflect, become still. It is always more
helpful and more important to stop reading than to continue reading. Allow the
book to do its work, to awaken you from the old groves of your repetitive and
conditioned thinking
The form of this book can be seen as a revival for the present age of the oldest form
of recorded spiritual teachings, the sutras of ancient India. Sutras are powerful
pointers to the truth in the form of aphorisms or short sayings with little conceptual

elaboration. The Vedas and Upanishads are the early sacred teachings recorded in
the form of sutras, as are the words of the Buddha. The sayings and parables of
Jesus, too, when taken out of their narrative context could be regarded as sutras as
well as the profound teachings contained in the Tao Te Ching, the ancient Chinese
book of wisdom.
The advantage of the sutra form lies in its brevity. It does not engage the thinking
mind more than is necessary. What it doesn't say, but only points to, is more
important than what it says.
The sutra-like character, of the writings in this book is particularly marked in
chapter 1, Silence and Stillness, which contains only the briefest of entries. This
chapter contains the essence of the entire book and may be all that some readers
require. The other chapters are there for those who need a few more signposts.
Just like the ancient sutras, the writings contained within this book are sacred and
have come out of a state of consciousness we may call stillness. Unlike those
sutras, however, they don't belong to any one religion or spiritual tradition, but are
immediately accessible to the whole of humanity.
There is also an added sense of urgency here. The transformation of human
consciousness is no longer a luxury, so to speak, available only to a few, isolated
individuals, but a necessity if human kind is not to destroy itself. At the present
time, the dysfunction of the old consciousness and the arising of the new are both
accelerating. Paradoxically, things are getting worse and better at the same time,
although the worse is more apparent because it makes so much noise.
This book, of course, uses words that in the act of reading or listening, become
thoughts in your mind. But those are not ordinary thoughts: repetitive, noisy, selfserving, clamoring for attention. Just like every true spiritual teachers, just like the
ancient sutras, the thoughts within this book don't say “look at me", but “look
beyond me.” Because the thoughts came out of stillness, they have power, the
power to take you back into the same stillness from which they arose. That stillness
is also inner peace. And that stillness and peace is the essence of your being. It is
the stillness that will save and transform the world.

Chapter 1
Silence and Stillness
When you lose touch with inner stillness, you lose touch with yourself. When you
lose touch with yourself, you lose yourself in the world.
Your innermost sense of self, of who you are, is inseparable from stillness. This is
the “I Am” that is deeper than name and form.
***
Stillness is your essential nature. What is stillness? The inner space or awareness in
which the words on this page are being perceived and become thoughts. Without
that awareness, there would be no perception, no thoughts, no world.
You are that awareness, disguised as a person.
***
The equivalent of external noise is the inner noise of thinking. The equivalent of
external silence is inner stillness.
Whenever there is some silence around you — listen to it. That means just notice it.
Pay attention to it. Listening to silence awakens the dimension of stillness within
yourself, because it is only through stillness that you can be aware of silence.
See that in the moment of noticing the silence around you, you are not thinking.
You are aware, but not thinking.
***
When you become aware of silence, immediately there is that state of inner still
alertness. You are present. You have stepped out of thousands of years of collective
human conditioning.
***
Look at a tree, a flower, a plant. Let your awareness rest upon it. How still they are,
how deeply rooted in Being. Allow nature to teach you stillness.

***
When you look at a tree and perceive its stillness, you become still yourself. You
connect with it at a very deep level. You feel a oneness with whatever you perceive
in and through stillness. Feeling the oneness of yourself with all things is love.
***
Silence is helpful, but you don’t need it in order to find stillness. Even when there
is noise, you can be aware of the stillness underneath the noise, of the space in
which the noise arises. That is the inner space of pure awareness, consciousness
itself.
You can become aware of awareness as the background to all your sense
perceptions, all your thinking. Becoming aware of awareness is the arising of inner
stillness.
***
Any disturbing noise can be as helpful as silence. How? By dropping your inner
resistance to the noise, by allowing it to be as it is, this acceptance also takes you
into that realm of inner peace that is stillness.
Whenever you deeply accept this moment as it is — no matter what form it takes
— you are still, you are at peace.
***
Pay attention to the gap — the gap between two thoughts, the brief, silent space
between words in a conversation, between the notes of a piano or flute, or the gap
between the in-breath and out-breath.
When you pay attention to those gaps, awareness of “something” becomes — just
awareness. The formless dimension of pure consciousness arises from within you
and replaces identification with form.
***
True intelligence operates silently. Stillness is where creativity and solutions to
problems are found.

***
Is stillness just the absence of noise and content? No, it is intelligence itself — the
underlying consciousness out of which every form is born. And how could that be
separate from who you are? The form that you think you are came out of that and is
being sustained by it.
It is the essence of all galaxies and blades of grass; of all flowers, trees, birds, and
all other forms.
***
Stillness is the only thing in this world that has no form. But then, it is not really a
thing, and it is not of this world.
***
When you look at a tree or a human being in stillness, who is looking? Something
deeper than the person. Consciousness is looking at its creation.
In the Bible, it says that God created the world and saw that it was good. That is
what you see when you look from stillness without thought.
***
Do you need more knowledge? Is more information going to save the world, or
faster computers, more scientific or intellectual analysis? Is it not wisdom that
humanity needs most at this time?
But what is wisdom and where is it to be found? Wisdom comes with the ability to
be still. Just look and just listen. No more is needed. Being still, looking, and
listening activates the non-conceptual intelligence within you. Let stillness direct
your words and actions.

Chapter 2
Beyond the Thinking Mind
The human condition: Lost in thought.
***
Most people spend their entire life imprisoned within the confines of their own
thoughts. They never go beyond a narrow, mind-made, personalized sense of self
that is conditioned by the past.
In you, as in each human being, there is a dimension of consciousness far deeper
than thought. It is the very essence of who you are. We may call it presence,
awareness, the unconditioned consciousness. In the ancient teachings, it is the
Christ within, or your Buddha nature.
Finding that dimension frees you and the world from the suffering you inflict on
yourself and others when the mind-made “little me” is all you know and runs your
life. Love, joy, creative expansion, and lasting inner peace cannot come into your
life except through that unconditioned dimension of consciousness.
If you can recognize, even occasionally, the thoughts that go through your mind as
just thoughts, if you can witness your own mental-emotional reactive patterns as
they happen, then that dimension is already emerging in you as the awareness in
which thoughts and emotions happen — the timeless inner space in which the
content of your life unfolds.
***
The stream of thinking has enormous momentum that can easily drag you along
with it. Every thought pretends that it matters so much. It wants to draw your
attention in completely.
Here is a new spiritual practice for you: don’t take your thoughts too seriously.
***
How easy it is for people to become trapped in their conceptual prisons.
The human mind, in its desire to know, understand, and control, mistakes its

opinions and viewpoints for the truth. It says: this is how it is. You have to be
larger than thought to realize that however you interpret “your life” or someone
else’s life or behavior, however you judge any situation, it is no more than a
viewpoint, one of many possible perspectives. It is no more than a bundle of
thoughts. But reality is one unified whole, in which all things are interwoven,
where nothing exists in and by itself. Thinking fragments reality — it cuts it up into
conceptual bits and pieces.
The thinking mind is a useful and powerful tool, but it is also very limiting when it
takes over your life completely, when you don’t realize that it is only a small aspect
of the consciousness that you are
***
Wisdom is not a product of thought. The deep knowing that is wisdom arises
through the simple act of giving someone or something your full attention.
Attention is primordial intelligence, consciousness itself. It dissolves the barriers
created by conceptual thought, and with this comes the recognition that nothing
exists in and by itself. It joins the perceiver and the perceived in a unifying field of
awareness. It is the healer of separation.
***
Whenever you are immersed in compulsive thinking, you are avoiding what is. You
don’t want to be where you are. Here, Now.
***
Dogmas — religious, political, scientific— arise out of the erroneous belief that
thought can encapsulate reality or the truth. Dogmas are collective conceptual
prisons. And the strange thing is that people love their prison cells because they
give them a sense of security and a false sense of “I know.”
Nothing has inflicted more suffering on humanity than its dogmas. It is true that
every dogma crumbles sooner or later, because reality will eventually disclose its
falseness; however, unless the basic delusion of it is seen for what it is, it will be
replaced by others.
What is this basic delusion? Identification with thought.
***

Spiritual awakening is awakening from the dream of thought.
***
The realm of consciousness is much vaster than thought can grasp. When you no
longer believe everything you think, you step out of thought and see clearly that the
thinker is not who you are.
***
The mind exists in a state of “not enough” and so is always greedy for more. When
you are identified with mind, you get bored and restless very easily. Boredom
means the mind is hungry for more stimulus, more food for thought, and its hunger
is not being satisfied.
When you feel bored, you can satisfy the mind’s hunger by picking up a magazine,
making a phone call, switching on the TV, surfing the web, going shopping, or —
and this is not uncommon — transferring the mental sense of lack and its need for
more to the body and satisfy it briefly by ingesting more food.
Or you can stay bored and restless and observe what it feels like to be bored and
restless. As you bring awareness to the feeling, there is suddenly some space and
stillness around it, as it were. A little at first, but as the sense of inner space grows,
the feeling of boredom will begin to diminish in intensity and significance. So even
boredom can teach you who you are and who you are not.
You discover that a “bored person” is not who you are. Boredom is simply a
conditioned energy movement within you. Neither are you an angry, sad, or fearful
person. Boredom, anger, sadness, or fear are not “yours,” not personal. They are
conditions of the human mind. They come and go.
Nothing that comes and goes is you.
“I am bored.” Who knows this?
“I am angry, sad, afraid.” Who knows this?
You are the knowing, not the condition that is known.
***

Prejudice of any kind implies that you are identified with the thinking mind. It
means you don’t see the other human being anymore, but only your own concept of
that human being. To reduce the aliveness of another human being to a concept is
already a form of violence.
***
Thinking that is not rooted in awareness becomes self-serving and dysfunctional.
Cleverness devoid of wisdom is extremely dangerous and destructive. That is the
current state of most of humanity. The amplification of thought as science and
technology, although intrinsically neither good nor bad, has also become
destructive because so often the thinking out of which it comes has no roots in
awareness.
The next step in human evolution is to transcend thought. This is now our urgent
task. It doesn’t mean not to think anymore, but simply not to be completely
identified with thought, possessed by thought.
***
Feel the energy of your inner body. Immediately mental noise slows down or
ceases. Feel it in your hands, your feet, your abdomen, your chest. Feel the life that
you are, the life that animates the body.
The body then becomes a doorway, so to speak, into a deeper sense of aliveness
underneath the fluctuating emotions and underneath your thinking.
***
There is an aliveness in you that you can feel with your entire Being, not just in the
head. Every cell is alive in that presence in which you don’t need to think. Yet, in
that state, if thought is required for some practical purpose, it is there. The mind
can still operate, and it operates beautifully when the greater intelligence that you
are uses it and expresses itself through it.
***
You may have overlooked that brief periods in which you are “conscious without
thought” are already occurring naturally and spontaneously in your life. You may
be engaged in some manual activity, or walking across the room, or waiting at the

airline counter, and be so completely present that the usual mental static of thought
subsides and is replaced by an aware presence. Or you may find yourself looking at
the sky or listening to someone without any inner mental commentary. Your
perceptions become crystal clear, unclouded by thought.
To the mind, all this is not significant, because it has “more important” things to
think about. It is also not memorable, and that’s why you may have overlooked that
it is already happening.
The truth is that it is the most significant thing that can happen to you. It is the
beginning of a shift from thinking to aware presence.
***
Become at ease with the state of “not knowing.” This takes you beyond mind
because the mind is always trying to conclude and interpret. It is afraid of not
knowing. So, when you can be at ease with not knowing, you have already gone
beyond the mind. A deeper knowing that is non-conceptual then arises out of that
state.
***
Artistic creation, sports, dance, teaching, counseling — mastery in any field of
endeavor implies that the thinking mind is either no longer involved at all or at least
is taking second place. A power and intelligence greater than you and yet one with
you in essence takes over. There is no decision-making process anymore;
spontaneous right action happens, and “you” are not doing it. Mastery of life is the
opposite of control. You become aligned with the greater consciousness. It acts,
speaks, does the works.
***
A moment of danger can bring about a temporary cessation of the stream of
thinking and thus give you a taste of what it means to be present, alert, aware.
***
The Truth is far more all-encompassing than the mind could ever comprehend. No
thought can encapsulate the Truth. At best, it can point to it. For example, it can
say: “All things are intrinsically one.” That is a pointer, not an explanation.
Understanding these words means feeling deep within you the truth to which they

point.

Chapter 3
The Egoic Self
The mind is incessantly looking not only for food for thought; it is looking for food
for its identity, its sense of self. This is how the ego comes into existence and
continuously re-creates itself.
***
When you think or speak about yourself, when you say, “I,” what you usually refer
to is “me and my story.” This is the “I” of your likes and dislikes, fears and desires,
the “I” that is never satisfied for long. It is a mind-made sense of who you are,
conditioned by the past and seeking to find its fulfillment in the future.
Can you see that this “I” is fleeting, a temporary formation, like a wave pattern on
the surface of the water?
Who is it that sees this? Who is it that is aware of the fleetingness of your physical
and psychological form? I am. This is the deeper “I” that has nothing to do with
past and future.
***
What will be left of all the fearing and wanting associated with your problematic
life situation that every day takes up most of your attention? A dash–one or two
inches long, between the date of birth and date of death on your gravestone.
To the egoic self, this is a depressing thought. To you, it is liberating.
***
When each thought absorbs your attention completely, it means you identify with
the voice in your head. Thought then becomes invested with a sense of self. This is
the ego, the mind-made “me.” That mentally constructed self feels incomplete and
precarious. That’s why fearing and wanting are its predominant emotions and
motivating forces.

When you recognize that there is a voice in your head that pretends to be you and
never stops speaking, you are awakening out of your unconscious identification
with the stream of thinking. When you notice that voice, you realize that who you
are is not the voice–the thinker–but the one who is aware of it.
Knowing yourself as the awareness behind the voice is freedom.
***
The egoic self is always engaged in seeking. It is seeking more of this or that to add
to itself, to make itself feel more complete. This explains the ego’s compulsive
preoccupation with future.
Whenever you become aware of yourself “living for the next moment,” you have
already stepped out of that egoic mind pattern, and the possibility of choosing to
give your full attention to this moment arises simultaneously.
By giving your full attention to this moment, an intelligence far greater than the
egoic mind enters your life.
***
When you live through the ego, you always reduce the present moment to a means
to an end. You live for the future, and when you achieve your goals, they don’t
satisfy you, at least not for long.
When you give more attention to the doing than to the future result that you want to
achieve through it, you break the old egoic conditioning. Your doing then becomes
not only a great deal more effective, but infinitely more fulfilling and joyful.
***
Almost every ego contains at least an element of what we might call “victim
identity.” Some people have such a strong victim image of themselves that it
becomes the central core of their ego. Resentment and grievances form an essential
part of their sense of self.
Even if your grievances are completely “justified,” you have constructed an
identity for yourself that is much like a prison whose bars are made of thought
forms. See what you are doing to yourself, or rather what your mind is doing to
you. Feel the emotional attachment you have to your victim story and become

aware of the compulsion to think or talk about it. Be there as the witnessing
presence of your inner state. You don’t have to do anything. With the awareness
comes transformation and freedom.
***
Complaining and reactivity are favorite mind patterns through which the ego
strengthens itself. For many people, a large part of their mental-emotional activity
consists of complaining and reacting against this or that. By doing this, you make
others or a situation “wrong” and yourself “right.” Through being “right,” you feel
superior, and through feeling superior, you strengthen your sense of self. In reality,
of course, you are only strengthening the illusion of ego.
Can you observe those patterns within yourself and recognize the complaining
voice in your head for what it is?
***
The egoic sense of self needs conflict because its sense of a separate identity gets
strengthened in fighting against this or that, and in demonstrating that this is “me”
and that is not “me."
Not infrequently, tribes, nations, and religions derive a strengthened sense of
collective identity from having enemies. Who would the “believer” be without the
“unbeliever?"
***
In your dealings with people, can you detect subtle feelings of either superiority or
inferiority toward them? You are looking at the ego, which lives through
comparison.
Envy is a by-product of the ego, which feels diminished if something good happens
to someone else, or someone has more, knows more, or can do more than you. The
ego’s identity depends on comparison and feeds on more. It will grasp at anything.
If all else fails, you can strengthen your fictitious sense of self through seeing
yourself as more unfairly treated by life or more ill than someone else. What are the
stories, the fictions from which you derive your sense of self?
***

Built into the very structure of the egoic self is a need to oppose, resist, and exclude
to maintain the sense of separateness on which its continued survival depends. So
there is “me” against the “other,” “us” against “them."
The ego needs to be in conflict with something or someone. That explains why you
are looking for peace and joy and love but cannot tolerate them for very long. You
say you want happiness but are addicted to your unhappiness.
Your unhappiness ultimately arises not from the circumstances of your life but
from the conditioning of your mind.
***
Do you carry feelings of guilt about something you did–or failed to do–in the past?
This much is certain: you acted according to your level of consciousness or rather
unconsciousness at that time. If you had been more aware, more conscious, you
would have acted differently.
Guilt is another attempt by the ego to create an identity, a sense of self. To the ego,
it doesn’t matter whether that self is positive or negative. What you did or failed to
do was a manifestation of unconsciousness–human unconsciousness. The ego,
however, personalizes it and says, “I did that,” and so you carry a mental image of
yourself as “bad."
Throughout history humans have inflicted countless violent, cruel, and hurtful acts
on each other, and continue to do so. Are they all to be condemned; are they all
guilty? Or are those acts simply expressions of unconsciousness, an evolutionary
stage that we are now growing out of?
Jesus’ words, “Forgive them for they know not what they do,” also apply to
yourself.
***
If you set egoic goals for the purpose of freeing yourself, enhancing yourself or
your sense of importance, even if you achieve them, they will not satisfy you.
Set goals, but know that the arriving is not all that important. When anything arises
out of presence, it means this moment is not a means to an end: the doing is
fulfilling in itself every moment. You are no longer reducing the Now to a means to
an end, which is the egoic consciousness.

***
"No self, no problem,” said the Buddhist master when asked to explain the deeper
meaning of Buddhism.

Chapter 4
The Now
On the surface it seems that the present moment is only one of many, many
moments. Each day of your life appears to consist of thousands of moments where
different things happen. Yet if you look more deeply, is there not only one moment,
ever? Is life ever not this moment? This one moment, now, is the only thing you
can never escape from. The one constant factor in your life. No matter what
happens. No matter how much your life changes. One thing is certain. Its always
now. Since there is no escape from the now, why not welcome it, become friendly
with it.
***
When you make friends with the present moment, you feel at home no matter
where you are. When you don't feel at home in the now, no matter where you go,
you will carry unease with you.

***
The present moment is as it is, always. Can you let it be?
***
The division of life into past, present and future is mind made, and, ultimately,
illusory.
The past and future are thought forms, mental abstractions. The past can only be
remembered Now. What you remember is an event that took place in the Now and
you remember it Now. The future, when it comes, is the Now. So the only thing
that is real, the only thing that ever is, is the Now.

***
To have your attention in the Now is not a denial of what is needed in your life. It
is recognizing what is primary. Then you can deal with what is secondary with
great ease. It is not saying, “I’m not dealing with things anymore because there is
only the Now.” No. Find what is primary first, and make the Now into your friend,
not your enemy. Acknowledge it, honor it. When the Now is the foundation and
primary focus of your life, then your life unfolds with ease.
***
Putting away the dishes, drawing up a business strategy, planning a trip–what is
more important: the doing or the result that you want to achieve through the doing?
This moment or some future moment?
Do you treat this moment as if it were an obstacle to be overcome? Do you feel you
have a future moment to get to that is more important?
Almost everyone lives like this most of the time. Since the future never arrives,
except as the present, it is a dysfunctional way to live. It generates a constant
undercurrent of unease, tension, and discontent. It does not honor life, which is
Now and never not Now.
***
Feel the aliveness within your body. That anchors you in the Now.
***
Ultimately you are not taking responsibility for life until you take responsibility for
this moment–Now. This is because Now is the only place where life can be found.
Taking responsibility for this moment means not to oppose internally the
“suchness” of Now, not to argue with what is. It means to be in alignment with life.
The Now is as it is because it cannot be otherwise. What Buddhists have always
known, physicists now confirm: there are no isolated things or events. Underneath
the surface appearance, all things are interconnected, are part of the totality of the
cosmos that has brought about the form that this moment takes.

When you say “yes” to what is, you become aligned with the power and
intelligence of Life itself. Only then can you become an agent for positive change
in the world.
***
A simple but radical spiritual practice is to accept whatever arises in the Now–
within and without.
***
When your attention moves into the Now, there is an alertness. It is as if you were
waking up from a dream, the dream of thought, the dream of past and future. Such
clarity, such simplicity. No room for problem making. Just this moment as it is.
***
The moment you enter the Now with your attention, you realize that life is sacred.
There is a sacredness to everything you perceive when you are present. The more
you live in the Now, the more you sense the simple yet profound joy of Being and
the sacredness of all life.
***
Most people confuse the Now with what happens in the Now, but that’s not what it
is. The Now is deeper than what happens in it. It is the space in which it happens.
So do not confuse the content of this moment with the Now. The Now is deeper
than any content that arises in it.
***
When you step into the Now, you step out of the content of your mind. The
incessant stream of thinking slows down. Thoughts don’t absorb all your attention
anymore, don’t draw you in totally. Gaps arise in between thoughts–spaciousness,
stillness. You begin to realize how much vaster and deeper you are than your
thoughts.
***
Thoughts, emotions, sense perceptions, and whatever you experience make up the

content of your life. “My life” is what you derive your sense of self from, and “my
life” is content, or so you believe.
You continuously overlook the most obvious fact: your innermost sense of I Am
has nothing to do with what happens in your life, nothing to do with content. That
sense of I Am is one with the Now. It always remains the same. In childhood and
old age, in health or sickness, in success or failure, the I Am–the space of Now–
remains unchanged at its deepest level. It usually gets confused with content, and
so you experience I Am or the Now only faintly and indirectly, through the content
of your life. In other words: your sense of Being becomes obscured by
circumstances, your stream of thinking, and the many things of this world. The
Now becomes obscured by time.
And so you forget your rootedness in Being, your divine reality, and lose yourself
in the world. Confusion, anger, depression, violence, and conflict arise when
humans forget who they are.
Yet how easy it is to remember the truth and thus return home:
I am not my thoughts, emotions, sense perceptions, and experiences. I am not the
content of my life. I am Life. I am the space in which all things happen. I am
consciousness. I am the Now. I Am.

Chapter 5
Who You Truly Are
The now is inseparable from who you are at the deepest level.
***
Many things in your life matter but only one thing matters absolutely.
It matters whether you succeed or fail in the eyes of the world. It matters whether
you are healthy or not healthy, whether you are educated or not educated. It matters
whether you are rich or poor. It certainly makes a difference in your life.
Yes, all these things matter, relatively speaking. But they don't matter absolutely.
There is something that matters more than any of those things and that is finding

the essence of who your are beyond that short-lived entity, that short-lived
personalized sense of self.
You find peace not by rearranging the circumstances of your life but by realizing
who you are at the deepest level.
***
Reincarnation doesn't help you if in your next incarnation you still don't know who
you are.
***
All the misery on the planet arises due to a personalized sense of me or us. That
covers up the essence of who you are. When you are unaware of that inner essence,
in the end, you always create misery. It's as simple as that. When you don't know
who you are, you create a mind-made self as a substitute for your beautiful, divine
being and cling to that fearful and needy self. Protecting and enhancing that false
sense of self then becomes your primary motivating force.
***
Many expressions that are in common usage and sometimes the structure of
language itself, reveal the fact that people don't know who they are. You say, “He
lost his life.” Or, “my life” as if life were something that you can possess or lose.
The truth is you don't have a life, you are life, the one life, the one conscious that
pervades the entire universe and takes temporary form to experience itself as a
stone or a blade of grass, as an animal, a person, a star or a galaxy. Can you sense
deep within that you already know that. Can you sense that you already are that?
***
For most things in life, you need time: to learn a new skill, build a house, become
an expert, make a cup of tea.
Time is useless, however, for the most essential thing in life, the one thing that
really matters, self-realization–which means knowing who you are beyond the
surface self, beyond your name, your physical form, your history, your story.
You cannot find yourself in the past or future. The only place where you can find

yourself in the Now. Spiritual seekers look for self realization or enlightenment in
the future. To be a seeker implies that you need the future. If this is what you
believe, it becomes true for you. You will need time until you realize that you don't
need time to be who you are.
***
When you look at a tree, you are aware of the tree. When you have a thought or
feeling, you are aware of that thought or feeling. When you have a pleasurable or
painful experience, you are aware of that experience. These seem to be true and
obvious statements. Yet if you look at them very closely, you will find that in a
subtle way their very structure contains a fundamental illusion, an illusion which is
unavoidable when you use language. Thought and language create an apparent
duality and a separate person where there is none.
The truth is you are not somebody who is aware of the tree, the thought, feeling or
experience. You are the awareness or consciousness in and by which those things
appear. As you go about your life, can you be aware of yourself as the awareness in
which the entire content of your life unfolds?
***
You say, “I want to know myself.” You are the I. You are the knowing. You are the
consciousness through which everything is known and that cannot know itself. It is
itself. There is nothing to know beyond that. And yet all knowing arises out of it.
The “I” cannot make itself into an object of knowledge, of consciousness.
So you cannot become an object to yourself. That is the very reason the illusion of
egoic identity arose because mentally you made yourself into an object. “That's
me,” you say, and then you begin to have a relationship with yourself and tell
others and yourself your story.
***
By knowing yourself as the awareness in which phenomenal existence happens,
you become free of dependency on phenomena and free of self seeking in
situations, places, and conditions. In other words, what happens or doesn't happen
is not that important anymore. Things lose their heaviness, their seriousness. A
playfulness comes into your life. You recognize this world as a cosmic dance, the
dance of form. No more and no less.

***
When you know who you truly are, there is an abiding alive sense of peace. You
could call it joy because that's what joy is, vibrantly alive peace. It is the joy of
knowing yourself as the very life essence before life takes on form. That is the joy
of being, of being who you truly are.
***
Just as water can be solid, liquid, or gaseous, consciousness can be seen to be
frozen as physical matter, liquid as mind and thought, or formless as pure
consciousness. Pure consciousness is life before it comes into manifestation and
that life looks at the world of form through your eyes because consciousness is who
you are. When you know yourself as that, then you recognize yourself in
everything. It is a state of complete clarity of perception. You are no longer an
entity with a heavy past that becomes a screen of concepts through which every
experience is interpreted. When you perceive without interpretation, you can then
sense what it is that is perceiving. The most we can say in language is that there is a
field of alert stillness in which the perception happens. Through you, formless
consciousness has become aware of itself.
***
Most people's lives are run by desire and fear. Desire is the need to add something
to yourself in order to be yourself more fully. All fear is the fear of losing
something, and thereby become diminished and be less. These two movements
obscure the fact that being cannot be given or taken away. Being in its fullness is
already within you, now.

Chapter 6
Acceptance and Surrender
Whenever you are able, have a “look” inside yourself to see whether you are
unconsciously creating conflict between the inner and the outer, between your
external circumstances at that moment–where you are, who you are with, or what
you are doing–and your thoughts and feelings. Can you feel how painful it is to
internally stand in opposition to what is?

When you recognize this, you also realize that you are now free to give up this
futile conflict, this inner state of war.
***
How often each day, if you were to verbalize your inner reality at that moment,
would you have to say, “I don't want to be where I am?” What does it feel like
when you don't want to be where you are–the traffic jam, your place of work, the
airport lounge, the people you are with?
It is true, of course, that some places are good places to walk out of–and sometimes
that may well be the most appropriate thing for you to do. In many cases, however,
walking out is not an option. In all those cases, the “I don't want to be here” is not
only useless but also dysfunctional. It makes you and others unhappy.
It has been said: wherever you go, there you are. In other words: you are here.
Always. Is it so hard to accept that?
***
Do you really need to mentally label every sense perception and experience? Do
you really need to have a reactive like/dislike relationship with life where you are
in almost continuous conflict with situations and people? Or is that just a deepseated mental habit that can be broken? Not by doing anything, but by allowing this
moment to be as it is.
***
The habitual and reactive “no” strengthens the ego. “Yes” weakens it. Your form
identity, the ego, cannot survive surrender.
***
“I have so much to do.” Yes, but what is the quality of your doing? Driving to
work, speaking to clients, working on the computer, running errands, dealing with
the countless things that make up your daily life–how total are you in what you do?
Is your doing surrendered or non-surrendered? This is what determines your
success in life, not how much effort you make. Effort implies stress and strain,
needing to reach a certain point in the future or accomplish a certain result.
Can you detect even the slightest element within yourself of not wanting to be

doing what you are doing? That is a denial of life, and so a truly successful
outcome is not possible.
If you can detect this within yourself, can you also drop it and be total in what you
do?
***
“Doing one thing at a time.” This is how one Zen Master defined the essence of
Zen.
Doing one thing at a time means to be total in what you do, to give it your complete
attention. This is surrendered action–empowered action.
***
Your acceptance of what is takes you to a deeper level where your inner state as
well as your sense of self no longer depend on the mind's judgment of “good” or
“bad.”
When you say “yes” to the “isness” of life, when you accept this moment as it is,
you can feel a sense of spaciousness within you that is deeply peaceful.
On the surface, you may still be happy when it's sunny and not so happy when it's
rainy; you may be happy at winning a million dollars and unhappy at losing all
your possessions. Neither happiness nor unhappiness, however, go all that deep
anymore. They are ripples on the surface of your Being. The background peace
within you remains undisturbed regardless of the nature of the outside condition.
The “yes” to what is reveals a dimension of depth within you that is dependent
neither on external conditions nor on the internal conditions of constantly
fluctuating thoughts and emotions.
***
Surrender becomes so much easier when you realize the fleeting nature of all
experiences and that the world cannot give you anything of lasting value. You then
continue to meet people, to be involved in experiences and activities, but without
the wants and fears of the egoic self. That is to say, you no longer demand that a
situation, person, place, or event should satisfy you or make you happy. Its passing
and imperfect nature is allowed to be.

And the miracle is that when you are no longer placing an impossible demand on it,
every situation, person, place, or event becomes not only satisfying but also more
harmonious, more peaceful.
***
When you completely accept this moment, when you no longer argue with what is,
the compulsion to think lessens and is replaced by an alert stillness. You are fully
conscious, yet the mind is not labeling this moment in any way. This state of inner
nonresistance opens you to the unconditioned consciousness that is infinitely
greater than the human mind. This vast intelligence can then express itself through
you and assist you, both from within and from without. That is why, by letting go
of inner resistance, you often find circumstances change for the better.
***
Am I saying, “Enjoy this moment. Be happy?” No.
Allow the “suchness” of this moment. That's enough.
***
Surrender is surrender to this moment, not to a story through which you interpret
this moment and then try to resign yourself to it.
For instance, you may have a disability and can't walk anymore. The condition is as
it is.
Perhaps your mind is now creating a story that says, “This is what my life has come
to. I have ended up in a wheelchair. Life has treated me harshly and unfairly. I don't
deserve this.”
Can you accept the isness of this moment and not confuse it with a story the mind
has created around it?
***
Surrender comes when you no longer ask, “Why is this happening to me?”
***

Even within the seemingly most unacceptable and painful situation is concealed a
deeper good, and within every disaster is contained the seed of grace.
Throughout history, there have been women and men who, in the face of great loss,
illness, imprisonment, or impending death, accepted the seemingly unacceptable
and thus found “the peace that passeth all understanding.”
Acceptance of the unacceptable is the greatest source of grace in this world.
***
There are situations where all answers and explanations fail. Life does not make
sense anymore. Or someone in distress comes to you for help, and you don't know
what to do or say.
When you fully accept that you don't know, you give up struggling to find answers
with the limited thinking mind, and that is when a greater intelligence can operate
through you. And even thought can then benefit from that, since the greater
intelligence can flow into it and inspire it.
Sometimes surrender means giving up trying to understand and becoming
comfortable with not knowing.
***
Do you know of someone whose main function in life seems to be to make
themselves and others miserable, to spread unhappiness? Forgive them, for they too
are part of the awakening of humanity. The role they play represents an
intensification of the nightmare of egoic consciousness, the state of non-surrender.
There is nothing personal in all this. It is not who they are.
***
Surrender, one could say, is the inner transition from resistance to acceptance, from
“no” to “yes.” When you surrender, your sense of self shifts from being identified
with a reaction or mental judgment to being the space around the reaction or
judgment. It is a shift from identification with form–the thought or the emotion–to
being and recognizing yourself as that which has no form–spacious awareness.
***

Whatever you accept completely will take you to peace, including the acceptance
that you cannot accept, that you are in resistance.
***
Leave Life alone. Let it be.

Chapter 7
Nature
We depend on nature not only for our physical survival. We also need nature to
show us the way home, the way out of the prison of our own minds. We got lost in
doing, thinking, remembering, anticipating–lost in a maze of complexity and a
world of problems.
We have forgotten what rocks, plants, and animals still know. We have forgotten
how to be–to be still, to be ourselves, to be where life is: Here and Now.
***
Whenever you bring your attention to anything natural, anything that has come into
existence without human intervention, you step out of the prison of conceptualized
thinking and, to some extent, participate in the state of connectedness with Being in
which everything natural still exists.
To bring your attention to a stone, a tree, or an animal does not mean to think about
it, but simply to perceive it, to hold it in your awareness.
Something of its essence then transmits itself to you. You can sense how still it is,
and in doing so the same stillness arises within you. You sense how deeply it rests
in Being–completely at one with what it is and where it is. In realizing this, you too
come to a place of rest deep within yourself.
***
When walking or resting in nature, honor that realm by being there fully. Be still.
Look. Listen. See how every animal and every plant is completely itself. Unlike

humans, they have not split themselves in two. They do not live through mental
images of themselves, so they do not need to be concerned with trying to protect
and enhance those images. The deer is itself. The daffodil is itself.
All things in nature are not only one with themselves but also one with the totality.
They haven't removed themselves from the fabric of the whole by claiming a
separate existence: “me” and the rest of the universe.
The contemplation of nature can free you of that “me,” the great troublemaker.
***
Bring awareness to the many subtle sounds of nature–the rustling of leaves in the
wind, raindrops falling, the humming of an insect, the first birdsong at dawn. Give
yourself completely to the act of listening. Beyond the sounds there is something
greater: a sacredness that cannot be understood through thought.
***
You didn't create your body, nor are you able to control the body's functions. An
intelligence greater than the human mind is at work. It is the same intelligence that
sustains all of nature. You cannot get any closer to that intelligence than by being
aware of your own inner energy field–by feeling the aliveness, the animating
presence within the body.
***
The playfulness and joy of a dog, its unconditional love and readiness to celebrate
life at any moment often contrast sharply with the inner state of the dog's owner–
depressed, anxious, burdened by problems, lost in thought, not present in the only
place and only time there is: Here and Now. One wonders: living with this person,
how does the dog manage to remain so sane, so joyous?
***
When you perceive nature only through the mind, through thinking, you cannot
sense its aliveness, its beingness. You see the form only and are unaware of the life
within the form–the sacred mystery. Thought reduces nature to a commodity to be
used in the pursuit of profit or knowledge or some other utilitarian purpose. The
ancient forest becomes timber, the bird a research project, the mountain something
to be mined or conquered.

When you perceive nature, let there be spaces of no thought, no mind. When you
approach nature in this way, it will respond to you and participate in the evolution
of human and planetary consciousness.
***
Notice how present a flower is, how surrendered to life.
***
The plant that you have in your home–have you ever truly looked at it? Have you
allowed that familiar yet mysterious being we call plant to teach you its secrets?
Have you noticed how deeply peaceful it is? How it is surrounded by a field of
stillness? The moment you become aware of a plant's emanation of stillness and
peace, that plant becomes your teacher.
***
Watch an animal, a flower, a tree, and see how it rests in Being. It is itself. It has
enormous dignity, innocence, and holiness. However, for you to see that, you need
to go beyond the mental habit of naming and labeling. The moment you look
beyond mental labels, you feel that ineffable dimension of nature that cannot be
understood by thought or perceived through the senses. It is a harmony, a
sacredness that permeates not only the whole of nature but is also within you.
***
The air that you breathe is nature, as is the breathing process itself.
Bring your attention to your breathing and realize that you are not doing it. It is the
breath of nature. If you had to remember to breathe, you would soon die, and if you
tried to stop breathing, nature would prevail.
You reconnect with nature in the most intimate and powerful way by becoming
aware of your breathing and learning to hold your attention there. This is a healing
and deeply empowering thing to do. It brings about a shift in consciousness from
the conceptual world of thought to the inner realm of unconditioned consciousness.
***

You need nature as your teacher to help you re-connect with Being. But not only do
you need nature, it also needs you.
You are not separate from nature. We are all part of the One Life that manifests
itself in countless forms throughout the universe, forms that are all completely
interconnected. When you recognize the sacredness, the beauty, the incredible
stillness and dignity in which a flower or a tree exists, you add something to the
flower or the tree. Through your recognition, your awareness, nature too comes to
know itself. It comes to know its own beauty and sacredness through you!
***
A great silent space holds all of nature in its embrace. It also holds you.
***
Only when you are still inside do you have access to the realm of stillness that
rocks, plants, and animals inhabit. Only when your noisy mind subsides can you
connect with nature at a deep level and go beyond the sense of separation created
by excessive thinking.
Thinking is a stage in the evolution of life. Nature exists in innocent stillness that is
prior to the arising of thought. The tree, the flower, the bird, the rock are unaware
of their own beauty and sacredness. When human beings become still, they go
beyond thought. There is an added dimension of knowing, of awareness, in the
stillness that is beyond thought.
Nature can bring you to stillness. That is its gift to you. When you perceive and
join with nature in the field of stillness, that field becomes permeated with your
awareness. That is your gift to nature.
Through you nature becomes aware of itself. Nature has been waiting for you, as it
were, for millions of years.

Chapter 8
Relationships
How quick we are to form an opinion of a person, to come to a conclusion about

them. It is satisfying to the egoic mind to label another human being, to give them a
conceptual identity, to pronounce righteous judgment upon them.
Every human being has been conditioned to think and behave in certain ways–
conditioned genetically as well as by their childhood experiences and their cultural
environment.
That is not who they are, but that is who they appear to be. When you pronounce
judgment upon someone, you confuse those conditioned mind patterns with who
they are. To do that is in itself a deeply conditioned and unconscious pattern. You
give them a conceptual identity, and that false identity becomes a prison not only
for the other person but also for yourself.
To let go of judgment does not mean that you don’t see what they do. It means that
you recognize their behavior as a form of conditioning, and you see it and accept it
as that. You don’t construct an identity out of it for that person.
That liberates you as well as the other person from identification with conditioning,
with form, with mind. The ego then no longer runs your relationships.
***
As long as the ego runs your life, most of your thoughts, emotions, and actions
arise from desire and fear. In relationships you then either want or fear something
from the other person.
What you want from them may be pleasure or material gain, recognition, praise or
attention, or a strengthening of your sense of self through comparison and through
establishing that you are, have, or know more than they. What you fear is that the
opposite may be the case, and they may diminish your sense of self in some way.
When you make the present moment the focal point of your attention–instead of
using it as a means to an end–you go beyond the ego and beyond the unconscious
compulsion to use people as a means to an end, the end being self-enhancement at
the cost of others. When you give your fullest attention to whoever you are
interacting with, you take past and future out of the relationship, except for
practical matters. When you are fully present with everyone you meet, you
relinquish the conceptual identity you made for them–your interpretation of who
they are and what they did in the past–and are able to interact without the egoic
movements of desire and fear. Attention, which is alert stillness, is the key.

How wonderful to go beyond wanting and fearing in your relationships. Love does
not want or fear anything.
***
If her past were your past, her pain your pain, her level of consciousness your level
of consciousness, you would think and act exactly as she does. With this realization
comes forgiveness, compassion, peace.
The ego doesn’t like to hear this, because if it cannot be reactive and righteous
anymore, it will lose strength.
***
When you receive whoever comes into the space of Now as a noble guest, when
you allow each person to be as they are, they begin to change.
***
To know another human being in their essence, you don’t really need to know
anything about them–their past, their history, their story. We confuse knowing
about with a deeper knowing that is non-conceptual. Knowing about and knowing
are totally different modalities. One is concerned with form, the other with the
formless. One operates through thought, the other through stillness.
Knowing about is helpful for practical purposes. On that level, we cannot do
without it. When it is the predominant modality in relationships, however, it
becomes very limiting, even destructive. Thoughts and concepts create an artificial
barrier, a separation between human beings. Your interactions are then not rooted
in Being, but become mind-based. Without the conceptual barriers, love is naturally
present in all human interactions.
***
Most human interactions are confined to the exchange of words–the realm of
thought. It is essential to bring some stillness, particularly into your close
relationships.
No relationship can thrive without the sense of spaciousness that comes with
stillness. Meditate or spend silent time in nature together. When going for a walk or
sitting in the car or at home, become comfortable with being in stillness together.

Stillness cannot and need not be created. Just be receptive to the stillness that is
already there, but is usually obscured by mental noise.
If spacious stillness is missing, the relationship will be dominated by the mind and
can easily be taken over by problems and conflict. If stillness is there, it can contain
anything.
***
True listening is another way of bringing stillness into the relationship. When you
truly listen to someone, the dimension of stillness arises and becomes an essential
part of the relationship. But true listening is a rare skill. Usually, the greater part of
a person’s attention is taken up by their thinking. At best, they may be evaluating
your words or preparing the next thing to say. Or they may not be listening at all,
lost in their own thoughts.
True listening goes far beyond auditory perception. It is the arising of alert
attention, a space of presence in which the words are being received. The words
now become secondary. They may be meaningful or they may not make sense. Far
more important than what you are listening to is the act of listening itself, the space
of conscious presence that arises as you listen. That space is a unifying field of
awareness in which you meet the other person without the separative barriers
created by conceptual thinking. And now the other person is no longer “other.” In
that space, you are joined together as one awareness, one consciousness.
***
Do you experience frequent and repetitive drama in your close relationships. Do
relatively insignificant disagreements often trigger violent arguments and
emotional pain. At the root of it lie the basic egoic patterns: the need to be right,
and, of course, for someone else to be wrong, that is to say identification with
mental positions. There is also the ego's need to be periodically in conflict with
something or someone in order to strengthen its sense of separation between me
and the other, without which it cannot survive. In addition, there is the accumulated
emotional pain from the past that you and each human being carries within, both
from your personal past as well as the collective pain of humanity that goes back a
long, long time. This pain body is an energy field within you that sporadically takes
you over because it needs to experience more emotional pain for itself to feed on
and replenish itself. It will try to control your thinking and make it deeply negative.
It loves your negative thoughts since it resonates with every frequency and so can
feed on them. It will also provoke negative emotional reactions in people close to

you, especially your partner, in order to feed on the ensuing drama and emotional
pain. How can you free yourself from this unconscious identification with pain that
creates so much misery in life. Become aware of it. Realize that it is not who you
are and recognize it for what it is, past pain. Witness it as it happens in your
partner or in yourself. When your unconscious identification with it is broken,
when you are able to observe it in yourself, you don't feed it anymore and it will
gradually lose its energy charge.
***
Human interaction can be hell. Or it can be a great spiritual practice.
***
When you look upon another human being and feel great love towards them, or
when you contemplate beauty in nature and something within you responds deeply
to it, close your eyes for a moment and feel the essence of that love or that beauty
within you, inseparable from who you are, your true nature. The outer form is a
temporary reflection of what you are within, in your essence. That is why love and
beauty can never leave you, although all outer forms will.
***
What is your relationship with the world of objects, the countless things that
surround you, and that you handle everyday. The chair you sit on, the pen, the car,
the cup. Are they to you merely a means to an end or do you occasionally
acknowledge their existence, their being, no matter how briefly, by noticing them
and giving them your attention. When you get attached to objects, when you are
using them to enhance your worth in your own eyes and in the eyes of others,
concern about things can easily take over your whole life.
When there is self-identification with things, you don't appreciate them for what
they are because you are looking for yourself in them. When you appreciate an
object for what it is, when you acknowledge its being without mental projection,
you cannot not feel grateful for its existence. You may also sense that it is not
really inanimate, that it only appears so to the senses. Physicist will confirm that
on a molecular level, it is indeed, a pulsating energy field. Through selfless
appreciation of the realm of things, the world around you will begin to come alive
for you in ways you cannot comprehend with the mind.
***

Whenever you meet anyone, no matter how briefly, do you acknowledge their
being by giving them your full attention, or are you reducing them to a means to an
end, a mere function or role. What is the quality of your relationship with the
cashier at the supermarket, the parking attendant, the repair man, the customer?
A moment of attention is enough. As you look at them or listen to them, there is an
alert stillness. Perhaps only two or three seconds. Perhaps longer. That is enough
for something more real to emerge than the roles we usually play and identify with.
All roles are part of the conditioned consciousness that is the human mind. That
which emerges through the act of attention is the unconditioned–who you are in
your essence underneath your name and form. You are no longer acting out a
script. You become real. When that dimension emerges from within you, it also
draws it forth from within the other person. Ultimately, of course, there is no other
and you are always meeting yourself.

Chapter 9
Death and the Eternal
When you walk though a forest that has not been tamed and interfered with by
man, you will see not only abundant life around you, but you will also encounter
fallen trees and decaying trunks, rotting leaves and decomposing matter at every
step. Wherever you look, you will find death as well as life.
Upon closer scrutiny, however, you will discover that the decomposing tree trunk
and rotting leaves not only give birth to new life, but are full of life themselves.
Microorganisms are at work. Molecules are rearranging themselves. So death isn’t
to be found anywhere. There is only the metamorphosis of life forms. What can
you learn from this?
Death is not the opposite of life. Life has no opposite. The opposite of death is
birth. Life is eternal.
***
Sages and poets throughout the ages have recognized the dreamlike quality of
human existence–seemingly so solid and real and yet so fleeting that it could

dissolve at any moment.
At the hour of your death, the story of your life may, indeed, appear to you like a
dream that is coming to an end. Yet even in a dream there must be an essence that
is real. There must be a consciousness in which the dream happens; otherwise, it
would not be.
That consciousness–does the body create it or does consciousness create the dream
of body, the dream of somebody?
Why have most of those who went through a near-death experience lost their fear
of death? Reflect upon this.
***
Of course you know you are going to die, but that remains a mere mental concept
until you meet death “in person” for the first time: through a serious illness or an
accident that happens to you or someone close to you, or through the passing away
of a loved one, death enters your life as the awareness of your own mortality.
Most people turn away from it in fear, but if you do not flinch and face the fact that
your body is fleeting and could dissolve at any moment, there is some degree of
disidentification, however slight, from your own physical and psychological form,
the “me.” When you see and accept the impermanent nature of all life forms, a
strange sense of peace comes upon you.
Through facing death, your consciousness is freed to some extent from
identification with form. This is why in some Buddhist traditions, the monks
regularly visit the morgue to sit and meditate among the dead bodies.
There is still a widespread denial of death in Western cultures. Even old people try
not to speak or think about it, and dead bodies are hidden away. A culture that
denies death inevitably becomes shallow and superficial, concerned only with the
external form of things. When death is denied, life loses its depth. The possibility
of knowing who we are beyond name and form, the dimension of the transcendent,
disappears from our lives because death is the opening into that dimension.
***
People tend to be uncomfortable with endings, because every ending is a little
death. That’s why in many languages, the word for “good-bye” means “see you

again.”
Whenever an experience comes to an end–a gathering of friends, a vacation, your
children leaving home–you die a little death. A “form” that appeared in your
consciousness as that experience dissolves. Often this leaves behind a feeling of
emptiness that most people try hard not to feel, not to face.
If you can learn to accept and even welcome the endings in your life, you may find
that the feeling of emptiness that initially felt uncomfortable turns into a sense of
inner spaciousness that is deeply peaceful.
By learning to die daily in this way, you open yourself to Life.
***
Most people feel that their identity, their sense of self, is something incredibly
precious that they don’t want to lose. That is why they have such fear of death.
It seems unimaginable and frightening that “I” could cease to exist. But you
confuse that precious “I” with your name and form and a story associated with it.
That “I” is no more than a temporary formation in the field of consciousness.
As long as that form identity is all you know, you are not aware that this
preciousness is your own essence, your innermost sense of I Am, which is
consciousness itself. It is the eternal in you–and that’s the only thing you cannot
lose.
***
Whenever any kind of deep loss occurs in your life–such as loss of possessions,
your home, a close relationship; or loss of your reputation, job, or physical
abilities–something inside you dies. You feel diminished in your sense of who you
are. There may also be a certain disorientation. “Without this...who am I?”
When a form that you had unconsciously identified with as part of yourself leaves
you or dissolves, that can be extremely painful. It leaves a hole, so to speak, in the
fabric of your existence.
When this happens, don’t deny or ignore the pain or the sadness that you feel.
Accept that it is there. Beware of your mind’s tendency to construct a story around
that loss in which you are assigned the role of victim. Fear, anger, resentment, or

self-pity are the emotions that go with that role. Then become aware of what lies
behind those emotions as well as behind the mind-made story: that hole, that empty
space. Can you face and accept that strange sense of emptiness? If you do, you may
find that it is no longer a fearful place. You may be surprised to find peace
emanating from it.
Whenever death occurs, whenever a life form dissolves, God, the formless and
unmanifested, shines through the opening left by the dissolving form. That is why
the most sacred thing in life is death. That is why the peace of God can come to you
through the contemplation and acceptance of death.
***
How short-lived every human experience is, how fleeting our lives. Is there
anything that is not subject to birth and death, anything that is eternal?
Consider this: if there were only one color, let us say blue, and the entire world and
everything in it were blue, then there would be no blue. There needs to be
something that is not blue so that blue can be recognized; otherwise, it would not
“stand out,” would not exist.
In the same way, does it not require something that is not fleeting and impermanent
for the fleetingness of all things to be recognized? In other words: if everything,
including yourself, were impermanent, would you even know it? Does the fact that
you are aware of and can witness the short-lived nature of all forms, including your
own, not mean that there is something in you that is not subject to decay?
When you are twenty, you are aware of your body as strong and vigorous; sixty
years later, you are aware of your body as weakened and old. Your thinking too
may have changed from when you were twenty, but the awareness that knows that
your body is young or old or that your thinking has changed has undergone no
change. That awareness is the eternal in you–consciousness itself. It is the formless
One Life. Can you lose It? No, because you are It.
***
Some people become deeply peaceful and almost luminous just before they die, as
if something is shining through the dissolving form.
Sometimes it happens that very ill or old people become almost transparent, so to
speak, in the last few weeks, months, or even years of their lives. As they look at

you, you may see a light shining through their eyes. There is no psychological
suffering left. They have surrendered and so the person, the mind-made egoic
“me,” has already dissolved. They have “died before they died” and found the deep
inner peace that is the realization of the deathless within themselves.
***
To every accident and disaster there is a potentially redemptive dimension that we
are usually unaware of.
The tremendous shock of totally unexpected, imminent death can have the effect of
forcing your consciousness completely out of identification with form. In the last
few moments before physical death, and as you die, you then experience yourself
as consciousness free of form. Suddenly, there is no more fear, just peace and a
knowing that “all is well” and that death is only a form dissolving. Death is then
recognized as ultimately illusory–as illusory as the form you had identified with as
yourself.
***
Death is not an anomaly or the most dreadful of all events as modern culture would
have you believe, but the most natural thing in the world, inseparable from and just
as natural as its other polarity–birth. Remind yourself of this when you sit with a
dying person.
It is a great privilege and a sacred act to be present at a person’s death as a witness
and companion.
When you sit with a dying person, do not deny any aspect of that experience. Do
not deny what is happening and do not deny your feelings. The recognition that
there is nothing you can do may make you feel helpless, sad, or angry. Accept what
you feel. Then go one step further: accept that there is nothing you can do, and
accept it completely. You are not in control. Deeply surrender to every aspect of
that experience, your feelings as well as any pain or discomfort the dying person
may be experiencing. Your surrendered state of consciousness and the stillness that
comes with it will greatly assist the dying person and ease their transition. If words
are called for, they will come out of the stillness within you. But they will be
secondary.
With the stillness comes the benediction: peace.

Chapter 10
Suffering and the End of Suffering
The interconnectedness of all things: Buddhists have always known it and
physicists now confirm it. Nothing that happens is an isolated event, it only appears
to be. The more we judge and label it, the more we isolate it.
The wholeness of life becomes fragmented through our thinking. Yet the totality of
life has brought this event about. It is part of the web of interconnectedness that is
the cosmos. This means whatever is could not be otherwise.
In most cases, we cannot begin to understand what role a seemingly senseless
event may have within the totality of the cosmos but recognizing its inevitability
within the vastness of the whole can be the beginning of an inner acceptance of
what is and thus a realignment with the wholeness of life.
***
True freedom and the end of suffering is living in such a way as if you had
completely chosen whatever you feel or experience at this moment. This inner
alignment with Now is the end of suffering.
***
Is suffering really necessary. Yes and no. If you had not suffered as you have, there
would be no depths to you as a human being–no humility, no compassion. You
would not be listening to this now. Suffering cracks open the shell of ego. And then
comes a point where it has served its purpose.
Suffering is necessary until you realize that it is unnecessary.
***
Unhappiness needs a mind-made me with a story, the conceptual identity. It needs
time, past and future. When you remove time from your unhappiness, what is it that
remains? The “suchness” of this moment remains. It may be a feeling of heaviness
of heaviness, agitation, tightness, anger or even nausea. That is not unhappiness
and it is not a personal problem.

There is nothing personal in human pain. It is simply an intense pressure or an
intense energy you feel somewhere in the body. By giving it attention, the feeling
doesn't turn into thinking and thus activate the unhappy me. See what happens
when you just allow a feeling to be.
***
Much suffering, much unhappiness arises when you take each thought that comes
into your head for the truth. Situations don't make you unhappy. They may cause
you physical pain, but they don't make you unhappy. Your thoughts make you
unhappy. Your interpretations, the stories you tell yourself make you unhappy.
“The thoughts I'm thinking right now make me unhappy.” This realization breaks
you unconscious identification with those thoughts.
***
“What a miserable day.” “He didn't have the decency to return my call.” “She let
me down.” Little stores we tell ourselves and others, often in the form of
complaints. They are unconsciously designed to enhance our always deficient sense
of self through being right and making something or someone wrong. Being right
places us in a position of imagined superiority and so strengthens our false sense of
self, the ego. This also creates some kind of enemy. Yes, the ego needs enemies to
define its boundary. And even the weather can serve that function. Through
habitual mental judgment and emotional contraction you have a personalized
reactive relationship to people and events in your life. These are all forms of selfcreated suffering but are not recognized as such because to the ego they are
satisfying. The ego enhances itself through reactivity and conflict. How simple life
would be without those stories. “It is raining.” “He did not call.” “I was there, she
was not.”
***
When you are suffering, when you are unhappy, stay totally with what is now.
Unhappiness or problems cannot survive in the Now.
***
Suffering begins when you mentally name or label a situation in some way as
undesirable or bad. You resent a situation and that resentment personalizes it and
brings in the reactive me. Naming and labeling are habitual but that habit can be

broken. Start practicing not naming with small things. If you miss the plane, drop
and break a cup, or slip and fall in the mud, can you refrain from naming the
experience as bad or painful? Can you immediately accept the “isness” of that
moment.
Naming something as bad causes an emotional contraction within you. when you
let it be without naming it, enormous power is suddenly available to you. The
contraction cuts you off from that power, the power of life itself.
***
They ate the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Go beyond good
and bad by refraining from mentally naming anything as good or bad. When you go
beyond the habitual naming, the power of the universe moves through you. When
you are in a nonreactive relationship to experiences, what you would have called
bad before, often turns around quickly, if not immediately through the power of life
itself. Watch what happens when you don't name an experience as bad and instead
bring an inner acceptance, an inner “yes” to it, and so let it be as it is.
***
Whatever your life situation is, how would you feel if you completely accepted it as
it is, right now?
***
There are many subtle and not so subtle forms of suffering that are so normal, they
are usually not recognized as suffering and may even feel satisfying to the ego.
Irritation, impatience, anger, having an issue with something or someone,
resentment, complaining. You can learn to recognize all those forms of suffering as
they happen and know at this moment I am creating suffering for myself.
If you are in the habit of creating suffering for yourself, you are probably creating
suffering for others too. These unconscious mind patters tend to come to an end
simply by making them conscious, by becoming aware of them as they happen.
You cannot be conscious and create suffering for yourself.
***
This is the miracle. behind every condition, person or situation that appears bad or
evil, lies concealed a deeper good. That deeper good reveals itself to you, both

within and without through inner acceptance of what is. “Resist not evil” is one of
the highest truths of humanity.
***
A dialog:
"Accept what is."
"I truly cannot. I am agitated and angry about this."
"Then accept what is."
"Accept that I am agitated and angry? Accept that I cannot accept?"
"Yes. Bring acceptance into your non-acceptance. Bring surrender into your nonsurrender. Then see what happens."
***
Chronic physical pain is one of the harshest teachers you can have. Resistance is
futile is its teaching. Nothing could be more normal than an unwillingness to suffer.
Yet, if you can let go of that unwillingness, and instead allow the pain to be there,
you may notice a subtle inner separation from the pain, a space between you and
the pain, as it were. This means to suffer consciously, willingly. When you suffer
consciously, physical pain can quickly burn up the ego in you since ego consists
largely of resistance. The same is true of extreme physical disability. “You offer up
your suffering to God,” is another way of saying this.
***
You don't need to be a Christian to understand the deep universal truth that is
contained in symbolic form in the image of the cross. The cross is a torture
instrument. It stands for the most extreme suffering, limitation, and helplessness a
human being can encounter. Then suddenly that human being suffers willingly,
consciously, expressed through the words, “not my will, but thy will be done.” At
that moment, the cross, the torture instrument shows its hidden face.
It is also a sacred symbol, a symbol for the divine. That which seemed to deny the
existence of any transcendental dimension to life, through surrender becomes an
opening into that dimension.


The Gifts of Imperfection

Let Go of Who You Think You’re Supposed
to Be and Embrace Who You Are

by Brené Brown, Ph.D., L.M.S.W.

Hazelden
Center City, Minnesota 55012
hazelden.org
© 2010 by Brené Brown
All rights reserved. Published 2010
Printed in the United States of America
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise—without the express written permission of the
publisher. Failure to comply with these terms may expose you to legal action and
damages for copyright infringement.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Brown, C. Brené
The gifts of imperfection : let go of who you think you’re supposed to be and
embrace who you are / by Brené Brown.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-59285-849-1 (softcover)
1. Self-acceptance. 2. Self-esteem. I. Title.
BF575.S37B76 2010
158—dc22
2010016989
Editor’s note
The names, details, and circumstances may have been changed to protect the privacy
of those mentioned in this publication.
This publication is not intended as a substitute for the advice of health care
professionals.
13 12 11 10

12345 6

Cover design by David Spohn
Cover illustrations by Nicholas Wilton
Interior design and typesetting by Kinne Design

R
To Steve, Ellen, and Charlie.
I love you with my whole heart.

contents

Preface

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Acknowledgments .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Introduction: Wholehearted Living

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Courage, Compassion, and Connection:
The Gifts of Imperfection . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Exploring the Power of Love, Belonging, and
Being Enough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

xvii
1

7

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55

The Things That Get in the Way
Guidepost #1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Authenticity:
Letting Go of What People Think
Guidepost #2 . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Self-Compassion:
Letting Go of Perfectionism

ix

Guidepost #3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating a Resilient Spirit:
Letting Go of Numbing and Powerlessness

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Guidepost #4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Gratitude and Joy:
Letting Go of Scarcity and Fear of the Dark

•

vii

•

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

77

CONTENTS

Guidepost #5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Intuition and Trusting Faith:
Letting Go of the Need for Certainty
Guidepost #6 . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Creativity:
Letting Go of Comparison

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

93

Guidepost #7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Play and Rest:
Letting Go of Exhaustion as a Status Symbol and
Productivity as Self-Worth
Guidepost #8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Calm and Stillness:
Letting Go of Anxiety as a Lifestyle

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

99

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

105

Guidepost #9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Meaningful Work:
Letting Go of Self-Doubt and “Supposed To”

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Guidepost #10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cultivating Laughter, Song, and Dance:
Letting Go of Being Cool and “Always in Control”
Final Thoughts .

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

117

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

125

About the Research Process:
For Thrill-Seekers and Methodology Junkies
Notes

111

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

127

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

131

About the Author .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

•

viii

•

137

preface
Owning our story and loving ourselves through that process
is the bravest thing that we will ever do.

Once you see a pattern, you can’t un-see it. Trust me, I’ve tried. But when
the same truth keeps repeating itself, it’s hard to pretend that it’s just a
coincidence. For example, no matter how hard I try to convince myself
that I can function on six hours of sleep, anything less than eight hours
leaves me impatient, anxious, and foraging for carbohydrates. It’s a pattern.
I also have a terrible procrastination pattern: I always put off writing by
reorganizing my entire house and spending way too much time and money
buying ofﬁce supplies and organizing systems. Every single time.
One reason it’s impossible to un-see trends is that our minds are engineered to seek out patterns and to assign meaning to them. Humans are a
meaning-making species. And, for better or worse, my mind is actually
ﬁne-tuned to do this. I spent years training for it, and now it’s how I make
my living.
As a researcher, I observe human behavior so I can identify and name
the subtle connections, relationships, and patterns that help us make
meaning of our thoughts, behaviors, and feelings.
I love what I do. Pattern hunting is wonderful work and, in fact,
throughout my career, my attempts at un-seeing were strictly reserved for
my personal life and those humbling vulnerabilities that I loved to deny.
That all changed in November 2006, when the research that ﬁlls these
pages smacked me upside the head. For the ﬁrst time in my career, I was
desperate to un-see my own research.
Up until that point, I had dedicated my career to studying difﬁcult
emotions like shame, fear, and vulnerability. I had written academic

•

ix

•

PREFACE

pieces on shame, developed a shame-resilience curriculum for mental
health and addictions professionals, and written a book about shame
resilience called I Thought It Was Just Me.1
In the process of collecting thousands of stories from diverse men
and women who lived all over the country—ranging in age from eighteen
to eighty-seven—I saw new patterns that I wanted to know more about.
Yes, we all struggle with shame and the fear of not being enough. And,
yes, many of us are afraid to let our true selves be seen and known. But
in this huge mound of data there was also story after story of men and
women who were living these amazing and inspiring lives.
I heard stories about the power of embracing imperfection and
vulnerability. I learned about the inextricable connection between joy and
gratitude, and how things that I take for granted, like rest and play, are
as vital to our health as nutrition and exercise. These research participants trusted themselves, and they talked about authenticity and love
and belonging in a way that was completely new to me.
I wanted to look at these stories as a whole, so I grabbed a ﬁle and a
Sharpie and wrote the ﬁrst word that came to my mind on the tab:
Wholehearted. I wasn’t sure what it meant yet, but I knew that these
stories were about people living and loving with their whole hearts.
I had a lot of questions about Wholeheartedness. What did these folks
value? How did they create all of this resilience in their lives? What were
their main concerns and how did they resolve or address them? Can
anyone create a Wholehearted life? What does it take to cultivate what
we need? What gets in the way?
As I started analyzing the stories and looking for re-occurring themes,
I realized that the patterns generally fell into one of two columns;
for simplicity sake, I ﬁrst labeled these Do and Don’t. The Do column
was brimming with words like worthiness, rest, play, trust, faith, intuition, hope, authenticity, love, belonging, joy, gratitude, and creativity.
The Don’t column was dripping with words like perfection, numbing,
certainty, exhaustion, self-sufﬁciency, being cool, ﬁtting in, judgment,
and scarcity.
I gasped the ﬁrst time I stepped back from the poster paper and took

•

x

•

PREFACE

it all in. It was the worst kind of sticker shock. I remember mumbling,
“No. No. No. How can this be?”
Even though I wrote the lists, I was shocked to read them. When I
code data, I go into deep researcher mode. My only focus is on accurately
capturing what I heard in the stories. I don’t think about how I would say
something, only how the research participants said it. I don’t think about
what an experience would mean to me, only what it meant to the person
who told me about it.
I sat in the red chair at my breakfast room table and stared at these
two lists for a very long time. My eyes wandered up and down and
across. I remember at one point I was actually sitting there with tears in
my eyes and with my hand across my mouth, like someone had just
delivered bad news.
And, in fact, it was bad news. I thought I’d ﬁnd that Wholehearted
people were just like me and doing all of the same things I was doing:
working hard, following the rules, doing it until I got it right, always
trying to know myself better, raising my kids exactly by the books . . .
After studying tough topics like shame for a decade, I truly believed
that I deserved conﬁrmation that I was “living right.”
But here’s the tough lesson that I learned that day (and every day
since):
How much we know and understand ourselves is critically
important, but there is something that is even more essential to
living a Wholehearted life: loving ourselves.
Knowledge is important, but only if we’re being kind and gentle with
ourselves as we work to discover who we are. Wholeheartedness is as
much about embracing our tenderness and vulnerability as it is about
developing knowledge and claiming power.
And perhaps the most painful lesson of that day hit me so hard that
it took my breath away: It was clear from the data that we cannot give
our children what we don’t have. Where we are on our journey of living
and loving with our whole hearts is a much stronger indicator of parenting success than anything we can learn from how-to books.

•

xi

•

PREFACE

This journey is equal parts heart work and head work, and as I
sat there on that dreary November day, it was clear to me that I was
lacking in my own heart work.
I ﬁnally stood up, grabbed my marker off the table, drew a line under
the Don’t list, and then wrote the word me under the line. My struggles
seemed to be perfectly characterized by the sum total of the list.
I folded my arms tightly across my chest, sunk deep down into
my chair, and thought, This is just great. I’m living straight down the
shit list.
I walked around the house for about twenty minutes trying to un-see
and undo everything that had just unfolded, but I couldn’t make the
words go away. I couldn’t go back, so I did the next best thing: I folded
all of the poster sheets into neat squares and tucked then into a
Rubbermaid tub that ﬁt nicely under my bed, next to my Christmas
wrap. I wouldn’t open that tub again until March of 2008.
Next, I got myself a really good therapist and began a year of serious soul work that would forever change my life. Diana, my therapist,
and I still laugh about my ﬁrst visit. Diana, who is a therapist to many
therapists, started with the requisite, “So what’s going on?” I pulled out
the Do list and matter-of-factly said, “I need more of the things on this
list. Some speciﬁc tips and tools would be helpful. Nothing deep. No
childhood crap or anything.”
It was a long year. I lovingly refer to it on my blog as the 2007
Breakdown Spiritual Awakening. It felt like a textbook breakdown to
me, but Diana called it a spiritual awakening. I think we were both right.
In fact, I’m starting to question if you can have one without the other.
Of course, it’s not a coincidence that this unraveling happened in
November 2006. The stars were perfectly aligned for a breakdown: I was
raw from being newly sugar and ﬂour free, I was days away from my
birthday (always a contemplative time for me), I was burned out from
work, and I was right on the cusp of my midlife unraveling.
People may call what happens at midlife “a crisis,” but it’s not. It’s
an unraveling—a time when you feel a desperate pull to live the life you
want to live, not the one you’re “supposed” to live. The unraveling is a

•

xii

•

PREFACE

time when you are challenged by the universe to let go of who you think
you are supposed to be and to embrace who you are.
Midlife is certainly one of the great unraveling journeys, but there
are others that happen to us over the course of our lives:
• marriage
• divorce
• becoming a parent
• recovery
• moving
• an empty nest
• retiring
• experiencing loss or trauma
• working in a soul-sucking job

The universe is not short on wake-up calls. We’re just quick to hit the
snooze button.
As it turned out, the work I had to do was messy and deep. I slogged
through it until one day, exhausted and with mud still wet and dripping
off of my traveling shoes, I realized, “Oh, my God. I feel different. I feel
joyful and real. I’m still afraid, but I also feel really brave. Something
has changed—I can feel it in my bones.”
I was healthier, more joyful, and more grateful than I had ever felt. I
felt calmer and grounded, and signiﬁcantly less anxious. I had rekindled
my creative life, reconnected with my family and friends in a new way,
and most important, felt truly comfortable in my own skin for the ﬁrst
time in my life.
I learned how to worry more about how I felt and less about “what
people might think.” I was setting new boundaries and began to let go of
my need to please, perform, and perfect. I started saying no rather than
sure (and being resentful and pissed off later). I began to say “Oh, hell
yes!” rather than “Sounds fun, but I have lots of work to do” or “I’ll do
that when I’m _________ (thinner, less busy, better prepared).”
As I worked through my own Wholehearted journey with Diana, I

•

xiii

•

PREFACE

read close to forty books, including every spiritual awakening memoir
I could get my hands on. They were incredibly helpful guides, but I still
craved a guidebook that could offer inspiration, resources, and basically
serve as a soul traveler’s companion of sorts.
One day, as I stared at the tall pile of books precariously stacked on
my nightstand, it hit me! I want to tell this story in a memoir. I’ll tell the
story of how a cynical, smart-ass academic became every bit of the
stereotype that she spent her entire adult life ridiculing. I’ll fess up about
how I became the middle-aged, recovering, health-conscious, creative,
touchy-feely spirituality-seeker who spends days contemplating things
like grace, love, gratitude, creativity, authenticity, and is happier than
I imagined possible. I’ll call it Wholehearted.
I also remember thinking, Before I write the memoir, I need to use
this research to write a guidebook on Wholehearted living! By mid-2008,
I had ﬁlled three huge tubs with notebooks, journals, and mounds of
data. I had also done countless hours of new research. I had everything
I needed, including a passionate desire to write the book that you’re
holding in your hands.
On that fateful November day when the list appeared and I sunk into
the realization that I wasn’t living and loving with my whole heart, I
wasn’t totally convinced. Seeing the list wasn’t enough to fully believe
in it. I had to dig very deep and make the conscious choice to believe . . .
to believe in myself and the possibility of living a different life. A lot of
questioning, countless tears, and a huge collection of joyful moments
later, believing has helped me see.
I now see how owning our story and loving ourselves through that
process is the bravest thing that we will ever do.
I now see that cultivating a Wholehearted life is not like trying to
reach a destination. It’s like walking toward a star in the sky. We never really arrive, but we certainly know that we’re heading in the right direction.
I now see how gifts like courage, compassion, and connection only
work when they are exercised. Every day.
I now see how the work of cultivating and letting go that shows up in

•

xiv

•

PREFACE

the ten guideposts is not “to-do list” material. It’s not something we accomplish or acquire and then check off our list. It’s life work. It’s soul work.
For me, believing was seeing. I believed ﬁrst, and only then I was
able to see how we can truly change ourselves, our families, and our
communities. We just have to ﬁnd the courage to live and love with our
whole hearts. It’s an honor to make this journey with you!

•

xv

•

acknowledgments

Deepest gratitude to:
Patricia Broat, Karen Casey, Karen Chernyaev, Kate Croteau, April
Dahl, Ronda Dearing, Sid Farrar, Margarita Flores, Karen Holmes,
Charles Kiley, Polly Koch, Shawn Ostrowski, Cole Schweikhardt,
Joanie Shoemaker, Dave Spohn, Diana Storms, Ashley Thill, Sue Thill,
Alison Vandenberg, Yolanda Villarreal, Jo-Lynne Worley, my Move-aBody friends, my family, and the Lovebombers

•

xvii

•

INTRODUCTION

Wholehearted Living

Wholehearted living is about engaging in our lives from a place of
worthiness. It means cultivating the courage, compassion, and connection to wake up in the morning and think, No matter what gets done and
how much is left undone, I am enough. It’s going to bed at night thinking,
Yes, I am imperfect and vulnerable and sometimes afraid, but that doesn’t
change the truth that I am also brave and worthy of love and belonging.
The Journey

Wholehearted living is not a onetime choice. It is a process. In fact, I
believe it’s the journey of a lifetime. My goal is to bring awareness and
clarity to the constellation of choices that lead to Wholeheartedness
and to share what I’ve learned from many, many people who have dedicated themselves to living and loving with their whole hearts.
Before embarking on any journey, including this one, it’s important
to talk about what we need to bring along. What does it take to live and
love from a place of worthiness? How do we embrace imperfection?
How do we cultivate what we need and let go of the things that are holding
us back? The answers to all of these questions are courage, compassion,
and connection—the tools we need to work our way through our journey.
If you’re thinking, Great. I just need to be a superhero to ﬁght perfectionism, I understand. Courage, compassion, and connection seem
like big, lofty ideals. But in reality, they are daily practices that, when

•

1

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

exercised enough, become these incredible gifts in our lives. And the
good news is that our vulnerabilities are what force us to call upon these
amazing tools. Because we’re human and so beautifully imperfect, we
get to practice using our tools on a daily basis. In this way, courage,
compassion, and connection become gifts—the gifts of imperfection.
Here’s what you’ll ﬁnd in the pages that follow. In the ﬁrst chapter, I
explain what I’ve learned about courage, compassion, and connection
and how they are truly the tools for developing worthiness.
Once we get some clarity about the tools that we’re going to use on
this journey, in the next chapter we move to the heart of the matter: love,
belonging, and worthiness. I answer some of the most difﬁcult questions
of my career: What is love? Can we love someone and betray them? Why
does our constant need to ﬁt in sabotage real belonging? Can we love the
people in our lives, like our partners and children, more than we love
ourselves? How do we deﬁne worthiness, and why do we so often end
up hustling for it rather than believing in it?
We encounter obstacles on every journey we make; the Wholehearted journey is no exception. In the next chapter, we’ll explore what
I’ve found to be the greatest barriers to living and loving with our whole
hearts and how we can develop effective strategies to move through the
barriers and to cultivate resilience.
From there, we’ll explore the ten guideposts for the Wholehearted
journey, daily practices that provide direction for our journey. There’s
one chapter for each guidepost, and each chapter is illustrated with
stories, deﬁnitions, quotes, and ideas for making deliberate and inspired
choices about the way we live and love.
Deﬁning Moments

This book is full of big-concept words such as love, belonging, and
authenticity. I think it’s critically important to deﬁne the gauzy words
that are tossed around every day but rarely explained. And I think good
deﬁnitions should be accessible and actionable. I’ve tried to deﬁne these
words in a way that will help us unpack the term and explore the pieces.
When we dig down past the feel-good words and excavate the daily

•

2

•

INTRODUCTION: WHOLEHEARTED LIVING

activities and experiences that put the heart in Wholehearted living, we
can see how people deﬁne the concepts that drive their actions, beliefs,
and emotions.
For example, when the research participants talked about a concept
such as love, I was careful to deﬁne it as they experienced it. Sometimes
that required developing new deﬁnitions (like I actually did with love
and many other words). Other times, when I started looking around in
the existing literature, I found deﬁnitions that captured the spirit of the
participants’ experiences. A good example of this is play. Play is an
essential component to Wholehearted living, and when I researched the
topic, I discovered the amazing work of Dr. Stuart Brown.1 So, rather
than creating a new deﬁnition, I reference his work because it accurately
reﬂects what I learned in the research.
I realize that deﬁnitions spark controversy and disagreement, but
I’m okay with that. I’d rather we debate the meaning of words that are
important to us than not discuss them at all. We need common language
to help us create awareness and understanding, which is essential to
Wholehearted living.
Digging Deep

In early 2008, when my blog was still pretty new, I wrote a post about
breaking my “dig-deep” button. You know the dig-deep button, right?
It’s the button that you rely on when you’re too bone-tired to get up one
more time in the middle of the night or to do one more load of throwup-diarrhea laundry or to catch one more plane or to return one more
call or to please/perform/perfect the way you normally do even when
you just want to ﬂip someone off and hide under the covers.
The dig-deep button is a secret level of pushing through when we’re
exhausted and overwhelmed, and when there’s too much to do and too
little time for self-care.
In my blog post, I explained how I had decided not to ﬁx my digdeep button. I made a promise to myself that when I felt emotionally,
physically, and spiritually done, I’d try slowing down rather than relying
on my old standbys: pushing through, soldiering on, and sucking it up.

•

3

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

It worked for a while, but I missed my button. I missed having something to turn to when I was depleted and down. I needed a tool to help
me dig my way out. So, I turned back to my research to see if I could
ﬁnd a way to dig that was more consistent with Wholehearted living.
Maybe there was something better than just sucking it up.
Here’s what I found: Men and women who live Wholeheartedly
do indeed DIG Deep. They just do it in a different way. When they’re
exhausted and overwhelmed, they get
Deliberate in their thoughts and behaviors through prayer,
meditation, or simply setting their intentions;
Inspired to make new and different choices;
Going. They take action.
Since I made that discovery, I’ve been DIGging Deep the new way,
and it’s been pretty amazing. One example happened just recently when
I was lost in an Internet fog. Rather than working, I was just lulling
myself into a haze by mindlessly playing on Facebook and piddling on
the computer. It was neither relaxing nor productive—it was just a giant
time and energy suck.
I tried the new DIG Deep—get deliberate, inspired, and going. I told
myself, “If you need to refuel and losing yourself online is fun and
relaxing, then do it. If not, do something deliberately relaxing. Find
something inspiring to do rather than something soul-sucking. Then, last
but not least, get up and do it!” I closed my laptop, said a little prayer to
remind myself to be self-compassionate, and watched a movie that had
been sitting in a Netﬂix envelope on my desk for over a month. It was
exactly what I needed.
It wasn’t the old Dig Deep—the pushing through. I didn’t force myself
to start working or to do something productive. Rather, I prayerfully,
intentionally, and thoughtfully did something restorative.
Each guidepost has a DIG Deep section to help us start thinking
about how we get deliberate and inspired about our choices, and how
we take action. I share my personal DIG Deep strategies with you and

•

4

•

INTRODUCTION: WHOLEHEARTED LIVING

I encourage you to come up with your own. These new strategies have
been so much more effective than the old “pushing through.”
What I Hope to Contribute

This book is full of powerful topics such as self-compassion, acceptance, and gratitude. I’m not the ﬁrst to talk about these subjects, and I’m
certainly not the smartest researcher or the most talented writer. I am,
however, the ﬁrst to explain how these topics work individually and
together to cultivate Wholehearted living. And, maybe more important,
I’m certainly the ﬁrst person to come at these topics from the perspective of someone who has spent years studying shame and fear.
I can’t tell you how many times I wanted to give up my research on
shame. It’s extremely difﬁcult to dedicate your career to studying topics
that make people squeamish. On several occasions I’ve literally thrown
my hands up and said, “I quit. It’s too hard. There are so many cool
things to study. I want out of this!” I didn’t choose to study shame and
fear; the research chose me.
Now I know why. It was what I needed—professionally and personally—to prepare for this work on Wholeheartedness. We can talk about
courage and love and compassion until we sound like a greeting card
store, but unless we’re willing to have an honest conversation about what
gets in the way of putting these into practice in our daily lives, we will
never change. Never, ever.
Courage sounds great, but we need to talk about how it requires us
to let go of what other people think, and for most of us, that’s scary.
Compassion is something we all want, but are we willing to look at why
boundary-setting and saying no is a critical component of compassion?
Are we willing to say no, even if we’re disappointing someone? Belonging is an essential component of Wholehearted living, but ﬁrst we have
to cultivate self-acceptance—why is this such a struggle?
Before I start writing, I always ask myself, “Why is this book worth
writing? What’s the contribution that I’m hoping to make?” Ironically,
I think the most valuable contribution that I can make to the ongoing
discussions about love, belonging, and worthiness stems from my

•

5

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

experiences as a shame researcher.
Coming at this work with a full understanding of how the shame
tapes and gremlins keep us feeling afraid and small allows me to do
more than present great ideas; this perspective helps me share real
strategies for changing our lives. If we want to know why we’re all so
afraid to let our true selves be seen and known, we have to understand
the power of shame and fear. If we can’t stand up to the never good
enough and who do you think you are? we can’t move forward.
I only wish that during those desperate and defeated moments of my
past, when I was knee-deep in shame research, I could have known what
I know now. If I could go back and whisper in my ear, I’d tell myself the
same thing that I’ll tell you as we begin this journey:
Owning our story can be hard but not nearly as difﬁcult as
spending our lives running from it. Embracing our vulnerabilities
is risky but not nearly as dangerous as giving up on love and
belonging and joy—the experiences that make us the most vulnerable. Only when we are brave enough to explore the darkness
will we discover the inﬁnite power of our light.

•

6

•

Courage, Compassion, and Connection:

The Gifts of Imperfection

Practicing courage, compassion, and connection in our daily lives is
how we cultivate worthiness. The key word is practice. Mary Daly, a
theologian, writes, “Courage is like—it’s a habitus, a habit, a virtue:
You get it by courageous acts. It’s like you learn to swim by swimming.
You learn courage by couraging.” The same is true for compassion and
connection. We invite compassion into our lives when we act compassionately toward ourselves and others, and we feel connected in our
lives when we reach out and connect.
Before I deﬁne these concepts and talk about how they work, I want
to show you how they work together in real life—as practices. This is a
personal story about the courage to reach out, the compassion that
comes from saying, “I’ve been there,” and the connections that fuel our
worthiness.
The Gun-for-Hire Shame Storm

Not too long ago, the principal of a large public elementary school and
the president of the school’s parent-teacher organization (PTO) invited
me to speak to a group of parents about the relationship between
resilience and boundaries. I was in the process of collecting data about
Wholehearted parenting and schools at the time, so I was excited about the
opportunity. I had no idea what I was getting myself into.
The second I walked into the school auditorium, I felt this really strange
vibe from the parents in the audience. They almost seemed agitated.
•

7

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

I asked the principal about it, and she just shrugged her shoulders and
walked away. The PTO president didn’t have much to say about it either.
I chalked it up to my nerves and tried to let it go.
I was sitting in the front row when the principal introduced me. This
is always a very awkward experience for me. Someone is running
through a list of my accomplishments while I’m secretly trying to stave
off vomiting and talking myself out of running. Well, this introduction
was beyond anything I had ever experienced.
The principal was saying things like, “You might not like what
you’re going to hear tonight, but we need to listen for the sake of our
children. Dr. Brown is here to transform our school and our lives! She’s
going to set us straight whether we like it or not!”
She was talking in this loud, aggressive voice that made her seem
downright pissed off. I felt like I was being introduced for WWE WrestleMania. All we needed were the Jock Jams and a few strobe lights.
In hindsight, I should have walked up to the podium and said, “I’m
feeling very uncomfortable. I’m excited to be here, but I’m certainly not
here to set anyone straight. I also don’t want you to think that I’m trying
to transform your school in an hour. What’s going on?”
But I didn’t. I just started talking in my vulnerable I’m-a-researcherbut-I’m-also-a-struggling-parent way. Well, the die had been cast. These
parents were not receptive. Instead, I felt row after row of people glaring
at me.
One man, who was sitting right up front, had his arms folded across
his chest and his teeth clenched so tightly that the veins in his neck were
popping out. Every three or four minutes he’d shift in his seat, roll his
eyes, and sigh louder than I’ve ever heard anyone sigh. It was so loud
that I’m barely comfortable calling it a sigh. It was more like a humph!
It was so bad that the people next to him were visibly mortiﬁed by his
behavior. They were still inexplicably unhappy with me, but he was
making the entire evening unbearable for all of us.
As an experienced teacher and group leader, I know how to handle
these situations and am normally comfortable doing so. When someone
is being disruptive, you really only have two choices: ignore him or take

•

8

•

COURAGE, COMPASSION, AND CONNECTION: THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

a break so that you can privately confront him about his inappropriate
behavior. I was so knocked off my game by this weird experience that I
did the very worst thing possible: I tried to impress him.
I started talking louder and getting really animated. I quoted scary
research statistics that would freak out any parent. I served up my
authenticity for a big ole helping of You better listen to me or your kids
are going to drop out of third grade and take up hitchhiking, drugs, and
running with scissors.
Nothing. Nada.
I didn’t get a head nod or a slight grin or anything. I just managed to
freak out the other 250 already-pissy parents. It was a disaster. Trying to
co-opt or win over someone like that guy is always a mistake, because it
means trading in your authenticity for approval. You stop believing in
your worthiness and start hustling for it. And, oh man, was I hustling.
The second the talk ended, I grabbed my stuff and ran-walked to my
car. As I was pulling out of the parking lot, my face was growing hotter.
I felt small and my heart was racing. I tried to push back the instant
replay of me acting crazy, but I couldn’t stop thinking about it. The shame
storm was brewing.
When the shame winds are whipping all around me, it’s almost
impossible to hold on to any perspective or to recall anything good about
myself. I went right into the bad self-talk of God, I’m such an idiot. Why
did I do that?
The greatest gift of having done this work (the research and the
personal work) is that I can recognize shame when it’s happening. First,
I know my physical symptoms of shame—the dry mouth, time slowing
down, tunnel vision, hot face, racing heart. I know that playing the
painful slow-motion reel over and over in my head is a warning sign.
I also know that the very best thing to do when this is happening
feels totally counterintuitive: Practice courage and reach out! We have to
own our story and share it with someone who has earned the right to
hear it, someone whom we can count on to respond with compassion.
We need courage, compassion, and connection. ASAP.
Shame hates it when we reach out and tell our story. It hates having

•

9

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

words wrapped around it—it can’t survive being shared. Shame loves
secrecy. The most dangerous thing to do after a shaming experience is
hide or bury our story. When we bury our story, the shame metastasizes.
I remember saying out loud: “I need to talk to someone RIGHT NOW.
Be brave, Brené!”
But here’s the tricky part about compassion and connecting: We
can’t call just anyone. It’s not that simple. I have a lot of good friends,
but there are only a handful of people whom I can count on to practice
compassion when I’m in the dark shame place.
If we share our shame story with the wrong person, they can easily
become one more piece of ﬂying debris in an already dangerous storm.
We want solid connection in a situation like this—something akin to a
sturdy tree ﬁrmly planted in the ground. We deﬁnitely want to avoid the
following:
1. The friend who hears the story and actually feels shame for you.
She gasps and conﬁrms how horriﬁed you should be. Then there
is awkward silence. Then you have to make her feel better.
2. The friend who responds with sympathy (I feel so sorry for you)
rather than empathy (I get it, I feel with you, and I’ve been there).
If you want to see a shame cyclone turn deadly, throw one of these
at it: “Oh, you poor thing.” Or, the incredibly passive-aggressive
southern version of sympathy: “Bless your heart.”
3. The friend who needs you to be the pillar of worthiness and
authenticity. She can’t help because she’s too disappointed in your
imperfections. You’ve let her down.
4. The friend who is so uncomfortable with vulnerability that she
scolds you: “How did you let this happen? What were you thinking?” Or she looks for someone to blame: “Who was that guy?
We’ll kick his ass.”
5. The friend who is all about making it better and, out of her own
discomfort, refuses to acknowledge that you can actually be crazy
and make terrible choices: “You’re exaggerating. It wasn’t that
bad. You rock. You’re perfect. Everyone loves you.”
•

10

•

COURAGE, COMPASSION, AND CONNECTION: THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

6. The friend who confuses “connection” with the opportunity to
one-up you: “That’s nothing. Listen to what happened to me one
time!”
Of course, we’re all capable of being “these friends”—especially if
someone tells us a story that gets right up in our own shame grill. We’re
human, imperfect, and vulnerable. It’s hard to practice compassion when
we’re struggling with our authenticity or when our own worthiness is off
balance.
When we’re looking for compassion, we need someone who is
deeply rooted, able to bend, and, most of all, we need someone who
embraces us for our strengths and struggles. We need to honor our struggle by sharing it with someone who has earned the right to hear it. When
we’re looking for compassion, it’s about connecting with the right person at the right time about the right issue.
I called my sister. It’s only been since the 2007 Breakdown Spiritual
Awakening that I’ve called one of my sisters or my brother for shamecyclone support. I’m four years older than my brother and eight years
older than my sisters (they’re twins). Before 2007, I was pretty vested in
being the older, perfect (aka uptight, better than, and judgmental) sister.
Ashley was amazing. She listened and responded with total compassion. She had the courage to tap into her own struggles with worthiness
so that she could genuinely connect to what I was experiencing. She said
wonderfully honest and empathic things like, “Oh, man. That’s so hard.
I’ve done that dance. I hate that feeling!” That may not be what someone else would need to hear, but for me it was the best.
Ashley wasn’t uprooted and thrown into the storm created by my
experience. She also wasn’t so rigid that she snapped with judgment and
blame. She didn’t try to ﬁx me or make me feel better; she just listened
and had the courage to share some of her own vulnerabilities with me.
I felt totally exposed and completely loved and accepted at the same
time (which is the deﬁnition of compassion for me). Trust me when I tell
you that shame and fear can’t tolerate that kind of powerful connection
surging between people. That’s exactly why courage, compassion, and
connection are the tools we need for the Wholehearted journey. To top
•

11

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

it off, my willingness to let someone I care about see me as imperfect led
to a strengthening of our relationship that continues today—that’s why I
can call courage, compassion, and connection the gifts of imperfection.
When we’re willing to be imperfect and real, these gifts just keep giving.
Just a quick follow-up to the story: About a week after the wrestling
match/parenting talk, I found out that the school was experiencing a
hovering problem—parents were in the classrooms all day and interfering with instruction and class management. Without telling me, the
principal and PTO president had required the parents to attend my
lecture. They told the parents that I was coming to tell them why they
needed to stop hovering. In other words, I was set up as a helicopterparent mercenary. Not good. I may not be a fan of hovering in the classroom, but I’m also not a parenting gun-for-hire. The irony is that I had
no idea that was an issue, so I never even mentioned the topic.
With this story in mind, let’s take a closer look at each of the concepts of Wholeheartedness and how they work together.
Courage

Courage is a huge theme in my life. It seems that either I’m praying
for some, feeling grateful for having found a little bit, appreciating it
in other people, or studying it. I don’t think that makes me unique.
Everyone wants to be brave.
After interviewing people about the truths of their lives—their
strengths and struggles—I realized that courage is one of the most
important qualities that Wholehearted people have in common. And
not just any kind of courage; I found that Wholeheartedness requires
ordinary courage. Here’s what I mean . . .
The root of the word courage is cor—the Latin word for heart. In
one of its earliest forms, the word courage had a very different deﬁnition
than it does today. Courage originally meant “To speak one’s mind by
telling all one’s heart.” Over time, this deﬁnition has changed, and, today,
courage is more synonymous with being heroic. Heroics is important
and we certainly need heroes, but I think we’ve lost touch with the idea
that speaking honestly and openly about who we are, about what we’re

•

12

•

COURAGE, COMPASSION, AND CONNECTION: THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

feeling, and about our experiences (good and bad) is the deﬁnition of
courage. Heroics is often about putting our life on the line. Ordinary
courage is about putting our vulnerability on the line. In today’s world,
that’s pretty extraordinary.1
When we pay attention, we see courage every day. We see it when
people reach out for help, like I did with Ashley. I see it in my classroom
when a student raises her hand and says, “I’m completely lost. I have no
idea what you’re talking about.” Do you know how incredibly brave it is
to say “I don’t know” when you’re pretty sure everyone around you gets
it? Of course, in my twelve-plus years of teaching, I know that if one
person can ﬁnd the courage to say, “You’ve lost me,” there are probably
at least ten more students who feel the exact same way. They may not
take the risk, but they certainly beneﬁt from that one person’s courage.
I saw courage in my daughter, Ellen, when she called me from a
slumber party at 10:30 p.m. and said, “Mom, can you come get me?”
When I picked her up, she got in the car and said, “I’m sorry. I just
wasn’t brave enough. I got homesick. It was so hard. Everyone was
asleep, and I had to walk to Libby’s mom’s bedroom and wake her up.”
I pulled into our driveway, got out of the car, and walked around to
the backseat where Ellen was sitting. I scooted her over and sat next to
her. I said, “Ellen, I think asking for what you need is one of the bravest
things that you’ll ever do. I suffered through a couple of really miserable
sleepovers and slumber parties because I was too afraid to ask to go
home. I’m proud of you.”
The next morning during breakfast, Ellen said, “I thought about what
you said. Can I be brave again and ask for something else?” I smiled. “I
have another slumber party next weekend. Would you be willing to pick
me up at bedtime? I’m just not ready.” That’s courage. The kind we could
all use more of.
I also see courage in myself when I’m willing to risk being vulnerable
and disappointed. For many years, if I really wanted something to
happen—an invitation to speak at a special conference, a promotion, a
radio interview—I pretended that it didn’t matter that much. If a friend
or colleague would ask, “Are you excited about that television interview?”

•

13

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

I’d shrug it off and say, “I’m not sure. It’s not that big of a deal.” Of
course, in reality, I was praying that it would happen.
It’s only been in the last few years that I’ve learned that playing down
the exciting stuff doesn’t take the pain away when it doesn’t happen. It
does, however, minimize the joy when it does happen. It also creates a
lot of isolation. Once you’ve diminished the importance of something,
your friends are not likely to call and say, “I’m sorry that didn’t work
out. I know you were excited about it.”
Now when someone asks me about a potential opportunity that I’m
excited about, I’m more likely to practice courage and say, “I’m so excited about the possibility. I’m trying to stay realistic, but I really hope it
happens.” When things haven’t panned out, it’s been comforting to be
able to call a supportive friend and say, “Remember that event I told you
about? It’s not going to happen, and I’m so bummed.”
I recently saw another example of ordinary courage at my son Charlie’s
preschool. Parents were invited to attend a holiday music presentation
put on by the kids. You know the scene—twenty-ﬁve children singing
with ﬁfty-plus parents, grandparents, and siblings in the audience wielding thirty-nine video cameras. The parents were holding up cameras in
the air and randomly snapping pictures while they scrambled to make
sure that their kids knew they were there and on time.
In addition to all the commotion in the audience, one three-year-old
girl, who was new to the class, cried her way through the entire performance because she couldn’t see her mom from the makeshift stage.
As it turns out, her mother was stuck in trafﬁc and missed the performance. By the time her mother arrived, I was kneeling by the classroom
door telling Charlie good-bye. From my low vantage point, I watched
the girl’s mother burst through the door and immediately start scanning
the room to ﬁnd her daughter. Just as I was getting ready to stand up and
point her toward the back of the classroom where a teacher was holding
her daughter, another mother walked by us, looked straight at this
stressed mom, shook her head, and rolled her eyes.
I stood up, took a deep breath, and tried to reason with the part of
me that wanted to chase after the better-than-you eye-rolling mom and

•

14

•

COURAGE, COMPASSION, AND CONNECTION: THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

kick her perfectly punctual ass. Just then two more moms walked up to
this now tearful mother and smiled. One of the mothers put her hand on
top of the woman’s shoulder and said, “We’ve all been there. I missed
the last one. I wasn’t just late. I completely forgot.” I watched as the
woman’s face softened, and she wiped away a tear. The second woman
looked at her and said, “My son was the only one who wasn’t wearing
pajamas on PJ Day—he still tells me it was the most rotten day ever. It
will be okay. We’re all in the same boat.”
By the time this mother made it to the back of the room where the
teacher was still comforting her daughter, she looked calm. Something
that I’m sure came in handy when her daughter lunged for her from
about six feet away. The moms who stopped and shared their stories of
imperfection and vulnerability were practicing courage. They took the
time to stop and say, “Here’s my story. You’re not alone.” They didn’t
have to stop and share; they could have easily joined the perfect-parent
parade and marched right by her.
As these stories illustrate, courage has a ripple effect. Every time we
choose courage, we make everyone around us a little better and the
world a little braver. And our world could stand to be a little kinder
and braver.
Compassion

To prepare for writing my book on shame, I read everything I could ﬁnd
on compassion. I ultimately found a powerful ﬁt between the stories I
heard in the interviews and the work of American Buddhist nun Pema
Chödrön. In her book The Places That Scare You, Chödrön writes,
“When we practice generating compassion, we can expect to experience
the fear of our pain. Compassion practice is daring. It involves learning
to relax and allow ourselves to move gently toward what scares us.” 2
What I love about Chödrön’s deﬁnition is her honesty about the
vulnerability of practicing compassion. If we take a closer look at the
origin of the word compassion, much like we did with courage, we see
why compassion is not typically our ﬁrst response to suffering. The word
compassion is derived from the Latin words pati and cum, meaning

•

15

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

“to suffer with.” I don’t believe that compassion is our default response.
I think our ﬁrst response to pain—ours or someone else’s—is to selfprotect. We protect ourselves by looking for someone or something to
blame. Or sometimes we shield ourselves by turning to judgment or by
immediately going into ﬁx-it mode.
Chödrön addresses our tendency to self-protect by teaching that we
must be honest and forgiving about when and how we shut down: “In
cultivating compassion we draw from the wholeness of our experience—our suffering, our empathy, as well as our cruelty and terror. It
has to be this way. Compassion is not a relationship between the healer
and the wounded. It’s a relationship between equals. Only when we know
our own darkness well can we be present with the darkness of others.
Compassion becomes real when we recognize our shared humanity.” 3
In my story, Ashley was willing to be in my darkness with me. She
wasn’t there as my helper or to ﬁx me; she was just with me—as an
equal—holding my hand as I waded through my feelings.
Boundaries and Compassion

One of the greatest (and least discussed) barriers to compassion practice
is the fear of setting boundaries and holding people accountable. I know
it sounds strange, but I believe that understanding the connection
between boundaries, accountability, acceptance, and compassion has
made me a kinder person. Before the breakdown, I was sweeter—judgmental, resentful, and angry on the inside—but sweeter on the outside.
Today, I think I’m genuinely more compassionate, less judgmental and
resentful, and way more serious about boundaries. I have no idea what
this combination looks like on the outside, but it feels pretty powerful on
the inside.
Before this research, I knew a lot about each one of these concepts,
but I didn’t understand how they ﬁt together. During the interviews, it
blew my mind when I realized that many of the truly committed compassion practitioners were also the most boundary-conscious people in
the study. Compassionate people are boundaried people. I was stunned.
Here’s what I learned: The heart of compassion is really acceptance.

•

16

•

COURAGE, COMPASSION, AND CONNECTION: THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

The better we are at accepting ourselves and others, the more compassionate we become. Well, it’s difﬁcult to accept people when they are
hurting us or taking advantage of us or walking all over us. This research
has taught me that if we really want to practice compassion, we have
to start by setting boundaries and holding people accountable for their
behavior.
We live in a blame culture—we want to know whose fault it is and
how they’re going to pay. In our personal, social, and political worlds,
we do a lot of screaming and ﬁnger-pointing, but we rarely hold people
accountable. How could we? We’re so exhausted from ranting and raving
that we don’t have the energy to develop meaningful consequences and
enforce them. From Washington, DC, and Wall Street to our own schools
and homes, I think this rage-blame-too-tired-and-busy-to-followthrough mind-set is why we’re so heavy on self-righteous anger and so
low on compassion.
Wouldn’t it be better if we could be kinder, but ﬁrmer? How would
our lives be different if there were less anger and more accountability?
What would our work and home lives look like if we blamed less but had
more respect for boundaries?
I was recently brought in to talk with a group of corporate leaders
who were trying to manage a difﬁcult reorganization in their company.
One of the project managers told me that, after listening to me talk about
the dangers of using shame as a management tool, he was worried that
he shamed his team members. He told me that when he gets really frustrated, he singles people out and criticizes their work in team meetings.
He explained, “I’m so frustrated. I have two employees who just
don’t listen. I explain every single detail of the project, I check to make
sure they understand, and they still do it their way. I’m out of options. I
feel backed into a corner and angry, so I take them down in front of their
colleagues.”
When I asked him how he was holding these two employees
accountable for not following the project protocol, he replied, “What do
you mean by accountable?”
I explained, “After you check with them to make sure they understand

•

17

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

your expectations and the objectives, how do you explain the consequences of not following the plan or not meeting the objectives?”
He said, “I don’t talk about the consequences. They know they’re
supposed to follow the protocol.”
I gave him an example, “Okay. What would happen if you told them
that you were going to write them up or give them an ofﬁcial warning
the next time they violated protocol and that if it continues, they’re
going to lose their jobs?”
He shook his head and said, “Oh, no. That’s pretty serious. I’d have
to get the human resources people involved. That becomes a big hassle.”
Setting boundaries and holding people accountable is a lot more work
than shaming and blaming. But it’s also much more effective. Shaming
and blaming without accountability is toxic to couples, families, organizations, and communities. First, when we shame and blame, it moves
the focus from the original behavior in question to our own behavior. By
the time this boss is ﬁnished shaming and humiliating his employees in
front of their colleagues, the only behavior in question is his.
Additionally, if we don’t follow through with appropriate consequences, people learn to dismiss our requests—even if they sound like
threats or ultimatums. If we ask our kids to keep their clothes off the
ﬂoor and they know that the only consequence of not doing it is a few
minutes of yelling, it’s fair for them to believe that it’s really not that
important to us.
It’s hard for us to understand that we can be compassionate and
accepting while we hold people accountable for their behaviors. We can,
and, in fact, it’s the best way to do it. We can confront someone about
their behavior, or ﬁre someone, or fail a student, or discipline a child
without berating them or putting them down. The key is to separate
people from their behaviors—to address what they’re doing, not who
they are (I’ll talk more about this in the next chapter). It’s also important
that we can lean into the discomfort that comes with straddling compassion
and boundaries. We have to stay away from convincing ourselves that we
hate someone or that they deserve to feel bad so that we can feel better
about holding them accountable. That’s where we get into trouble. When

•

18

•

COURAGE, COMPASSION, AND CONNECTION: THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

we talk ourselves into disliking someone so we’re more comfortable
holding them accountable, we’re priming ourselves for the shame and
blame game.
When we fail to set boundaries and hold people accountable, we feel
used and mistreated. This is why we sometimes attack who they are,
which is far more hurtful than addressing a behavior or a choice. For our
own sake, we need to understand that it’s dangerous to our relationships
and our well-being to get mired in shame and blame, or to be full of selfrighteous anger. It’s also impossible to practice compassion from a place
of resentment. If we’re going to practice acceptance and compassion, we
need boundaries and accountability.
Connection

I deﬁne connection as the energy that exists between people when they
feel seen, heard, and valued; when they can give and receive without
judgment; and when they derive sustenance and strength from the relationship.
Ashley and I felt deeply connected after our experience. I know I
was seen, heard, and valued. Even though it was scary, I was able to
reach out for support and help. And we both felt strengthened and fulﬁlled. In fact, a couple of weeks later, Ashley said, “I can’t tell you how
glad I am that you called me that day. It helped me so much to know that
I’m not the only one who does stuff like that. I also love knowing that
I can help you and that you trust me.” Connection begets connection.
As a matter of fact, we are wired for connection. It’s in our biology.
From the time we are born, we need connection to thrive emotionally,
physically, spiritually, and intellectually. A decade ago, the idea that
we’re “wired for connection” might have been perceived as touchy-feely
or New Age. Today, we know that the need for connection is more than
a feeling or a hunch. It’s hard science. Neuroscience, to be exact.
In his book Social Intelligence: The New Science of Human Relationships, Daniel Goleman explores how the latest ﬁndings in biology and
neuroscience conﬁrm that we are hardwired for connection and that our
relationships shape our biology as well as our experiences. Goleman

•

19

•

THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

writes, “Even our most routine encounters act as regulators in the brain,
priming our emotions, some desirable, others not. The more strongly
connected we are with someone emotionally, the greater the mutual
force.” 4 It’s amazing—yet perhaps not surprising—that the connectedness we experience in our relationships impacts the way our brain
develops and performs.
Our innate need for connection makes the consequences of disconnection that much more real and dangerous. Sometimes we only think
we’re connected. Technology, for instance, has become a kind of
imposter for connection, making us believe we’re connected when we’re
really not—at least not in the ways we need to be. In our technologycrazed world, we’ve confused being communicative with feeling connected. Just because we’re plugged in, doesn’t mean we feel seen and
heard. In fact, hyper-communication can mean we spend more time on
Facebook than we do face-to-face with the people we care about. I can’t
tell you how many times I’ve walked into a restaurant and seen two parents on their cell phones while their kids are busy texting or playing
video games. What’s the point of even sitting together?
As we think about the deﬁnition of connection and how easy it is to
mistake technology for connecting, we also need to consider letting go
of the myth of self-sufﬁciency. One of the greatest barriers to connection
is the cultural importance we place on “going it alone.” Somehow we’ve
come to equate success with not needing anyone. Many of us are willing to extend a helping hand, but we’re very reluctant to reach out for
help when we need it ourselves. It’s as if we’ve divided the world into
“those who offer help” and “those who need help.” The truth is that we
are both.
I’ve learned so much about giving and receiving from the men and
women who are engaged in Wholehearted living but nothing more important than this:
Until we can receive with an open heart, we are never really
giving with an open heart. When we attach judgment to receiving
help, we knowingly or unknowingly attach judgment to giving help.

•

20

•

COURAGE, COMPASSION, AND CONNECTION: THE GIFTS OF IMPERFECTION

For years, I placed value on being the helper in my family. I could
help with a crisis or lend money or dispense advice. I was always happy
to help others, but I would have never called my siblings to ask them for
help, especially for support during a shame storm. At the time, I would
have vehemently denied attaching judgment to my generous giving. But
now, I understand how I derived self-worth from never needing help and
always offering it.
During the breakdown, I needed help. I needed support and handholding and advice. Thank God! Turning to my younger brother and sisters completely shifted our family dynamics. I gained permission to fall
apart and be imperfect, and they could share their strength and incredible wisdom with me. If connection is the energy that surges between
people, we have to remember that those surges must travel in both directions.
The Wholehearted journey is not the path of least resistance. It’s a
path of consciousness and choice. And, to be honest, it’s a little counterculture. The willingness to tell our stories, feel the pain of others, and
stay genuinely connected in this disconnected world is not something
we can do halfheartedly.
To practice courage, compassion, and connection is to look at life
and the people around us, and say, “I’m all in.”

•

21

•

about the author

Dr. Brené Brown is a researcher, writer, and professor. She is a member of
the research faculty at the University of Houston Graduate College of Social
Work, where she has spent the past ten years studying a concept that she calls
Wholeheartedness, posing the questions: How do we engage in our lives
from a place of authenticity and worthiness? How do we cultivate the
courage, compassion, and connection that we need to embrace our imperfections and to recognize that we are enough—that we are worthy of love,
belonging, and joy?
Brené spent the ﬁrst seven years of her decade-long research journey
studying how the universal experiences of shame and fear affect us and how
practicing resilience in our everyday lives can change the way we live, love,
parent, and work.
In 2008, she was named Behavioral Health Scholar-in-Residence at
the Council on Alcohol and Drugs in Houston. Brené’s work has been
featured on PBS and the Oprah and Friends Radio Network, and her articles
have appeared in Self magazine, Elle magazine, and many national newspapers. She is also a frequent guest on radio shows across the United States.
Most recently, Houston Women Magazine named her one of “The 50 Most
Inﬂuential Women of 2009.”
In addition to this book, Brené is the author of I Thought It Was Just Me
(but it isn’t): Telling the Truth About Perfectionism, Inadequacy, and Power
(Gotham, 2007) and Wholehearted: Spiritual Adventures in Falling Apart,
Growing Up, and Finding Joy (Hazelden, forthcoming). She is also the author
of Connections, a psychoeducational shame-resilience curriculum that is being
facilitated across the nation by mental health and addictions professionals.
Brené lives in Houston with her husband, Steve, and their two young
children, Ellen and Charlie.
You can learn more about Brené and her research by visiting www
.brenebrown.com or by visiting her blog at www.ordinarycourage.com. For
a Gifts of Imperfection reading guide and a list of book recommendations,
please visit her Web site.

•

137

•

Hazelden, a national nonproﬁt organization founded in 1949, helps
people reclaim their lives from the disease of addiction. Built on
decades of knowledge and experience, Hazelden offers a comprehensive approach to addiction that addresses the full range of patient, family, and professional needs, including treatment and continuing care for
youth and adults, research, higher learning, public education and advocacy, and publishing.
A life of recovery is lived “one day at a time.” Hazelden publications, both educational and inspirational, support and strengthen lifelong
recovery. In 1954, Hazelden published Twenty-Four Hours a Day, the
ﬁrst daily meditation book for recovering alcoholics, and Hazelden continues to publish works to inspire and guide individuals in treatment and
recovery, and their loved ones. Professionals who work to prevent and
treat addiction also turn to Hazelden for evidence-based curricula, informational materials, and videos for use in schools, treatment programs,
and correctional programs.
Through published works, Hazelden extends the reach of hope,
encouragement, help, and support to individuals, families, and communities affected by addiction and related issues.
For questions about Hazelden publications, please call
800-328-9000 or visit us online at hazelden.org/bookstore.

ATRIA BOOKS
New York London

Toronto

Sydney

ATRIA

BOOKS

1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020

20827 N.W. Cornell Road, Suite 500
Hillsboro, Oregon 97124-9808
503-531-8700 tel 503-531-8773 fax
www.beyondvvord.com

Copyright © 2006 by TS Production Limited Liability Company
THE SECRET and The Secret logo are trademarks or registered trademarks
owned by or licensed to TS Production Limited Liability Company
www.thesecret.tv
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, copied, stored, or
transmitted in any form or by any means—graphic, electronic, or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval systems—
without the prior written permission of Atria Books/Beyond Words Publishing,
Inc., except where permitted by law.
The information contained in this book is intended to be educational and not
for diagnosis, prescription, or treatment of any health disorder whatsoever.
This information should not replace consultation with a competent healthcare
professional- The content of the book is intended to be used as an adjunct to a
rational and responsible healthcare program prescribed by a healthcare practitioner.
The author and publisher are in no way liable for any misuse of the material.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2006933243
1SBN-13:978-1-58270-170-7
ISBN-10:
1-58270-170-9
First Atria Books/Beyond Words hardcover edition November 2006
10
ATRIA BOOKS is a trademark of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
Beyond Words Publishing is a division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
Manufactured in the United States of America.
Book Design: Cozer Media P/L (Australia) www.gozer.com.au
For more information about special discounts for bulk
purchases, please contact Sifl ion & Schuster Special Sales
at 1-800-456-6798 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The corporate mission of Beyond Words Publishing, Inc: Inspire to Integrity

-The Emerald Tablet, circa 3000 BC

Dedicated to You
May The Secret bring you love and
joy for your entire existence.
That is my intention for you,
and for the world.

Foreword

ix

Acknowledgments

xiii

The Secret Revealed

1

The Secret Made Simple

27

How to Use The Secret

45

Powerful Processes

71

The Secret to Money

95

The Secret to Relationships

113

The Secret to Health

125

The Secret to the World

141

The Secret to You

155

The Secret to Life

177

Biographies

185

A year ago, my life had collapsed around me. I'd worked myself
into exhaustion, my father died suddenly, and my relationships
with my work colleagues and loved ones were in turmoil. Little
did I know at the time, out of my greatest despair was to come the
greatest gift.
I'd been given a glimpse of a Great Secret—The Secret to life. The
glimpse came in a hundred-year-old book, given to me by my
daughter Hayley. I began tracing The Secret back through history.
I couldn't believe all the people who knew this. They were the
greatest people in history: Plato, Shakespeare, Newton, Hugo,
Beethoven, Lincoln, Emerson, Edison, Einstein.
Incredulous, I asked, "Why doesn't everyone know this?" A burning desire to share The Secret with the world consumed me, and I
began searching for people alive today who knew The Secret.
One by one they began to emerge. I became a magnet: as I began
to search, one great living master after another was drawn to me.
ix

x

Foreword

When I discovered one teacher, that one would link to the next,
in a perfect chain. If I was on the wrong track, something else
would catch my attention, and through the diversion the next great
teacher would appear. If I "accidentally" pressed the wrong link
on an internet search, I would be led to a vital piece of information. In a few short weeks I had traced The Secret back through the
centuries, and I had discovered the modern-day practitioners of
the Secret.
The vision of taking The Secret to the world in a film had become
fixed in my mind, and over the following two months my film and
television production team learned The Secret. It was imperative
that every team member knew it, because without its knowledge,
what we were about to attempt would be impossible.
We did not have a single teacher secured to film, but we knew The
Secret, and so with utter faith I flew from Australia to the United
States where the majority of the teachers were based. Seven weeks
later The Secret team had filmed fifty-five of the greatest teachers
across the United States, with over 120 hours of film. With every
step, with every breath, we used The Secret to create the The Secret. We literally magnetized everything and everyone to us. Eight
months later The Secret was released.
As the film swept the world, stories of miracles began to flood in:
people wrote about healing from chronic pain, depression, and
disease; walking for the first time after an accident; even recovering
from a deathbed. We have received thousands of accounts of The Secret being used to bring about large sums of money and unexpected

Foreword

xi

checks in the mail. People have used The Secret to manifest their
perfect homes, life partners, cars, jobs, and promotions, with many
accounts of businesses being transformed within days of applying
The Secret. There have been heart-warming stories of stressed relationships involving children being restored to harmony.
Some of the most magnificent stories we have received have come
from children using The Secret to attract what they want, including
high grades and friends. The Secret has inspired doctors to share
the knowledge with their patients; universities and schools with
their students; health clubs with their clients; churches of all denominations and spiritual centers with their congregations. There
are Secret parties being held in homes around the world, as people
share the knowledge with loved ones and families. The Secret has
been used to attract all manner of things—from a specific feather
to ten million dollars. All of this has taken place in the few months
since the release of the film.
My intention in creating The Secret was—and still is—that it will
bring joy to billions around the world. The Secret team is experiencing the realization of that intention every day, as we receive
thousands upon thousands of letters from people across the world,
of all ages, all races/ and all nationalities, expressing gratitude for
the joy of The Secret. There isn't a single thing that you cannot do
with this knowledge. It doesn't matter who you are or where you
are, The Secret can give you whatever you want.
Twenty-four amazing teachers are featured in this book. Their
words were filmed all over the United States, all at different times.

xii

Foreword

yet they speak as one voice. This book contains The Secret teachers' words, and it also contains miraculous stories of The Secret in
action. I have shared all of the easy paths, tips, and shortcuts that I
have learned so that you can live the life of your dreams.
You will notice throughout the book that in certain places I have
capitalized the word "You." The reason I did this is because I want
you, the reader, to feel and know that I created this book for you. I
am speaking to you personally when I say You. My intention is for
you to feel a personal connection with these pages, because The
Secret has been created for You.
As you travel through its pages and you learn The Secret, you will
come to know how you can have, be, or do anything you want. You
will come to know who you really are. You will come to know the
true magnificence that awaits you.

With the deepest gratitude I wish to thank every person who
has come into my life and inspired, touched, and illuminated me
through their presence.
I would also like to acknowledge and express my gratitude to the
following people for their magnificent support and contributions
to my journey and to the creation of this book:
For generously sharing their wisdom, love, and divinity, I pay
homage to the featured co-authors of The Secret: John Assaraf,
Michael Bernard Beckwith, Lee Brower, Jack Canfield, Dr. John Demartini, Marie Diamond, Mike Dooley, Bob Doyle, Hale Dwoskin,
Morris Goodman, Dr. John Gray, Dr. John Hagelin, Bill Harris, Dr.
Ben Johnson, Loral Langemeier, Lisa Nichols, Bob Proctor, James
Ray, David Schirmer, Marci Shimoff, Dr. Joe Vitale, Dr. Denis Waitley, Neale Donald Walsch, and Dr. Fred Alan Wolf.
The magnificent human beings that make up The Secret production
team: Paul Harrington, Glenda Bell, Skye Byrne, and Nic George.
xiii

xiv Acknowledgments

Also to Drew Heriot, Daniel Kerr, Damian Corboy, and to all who
journeyed with us in the creation of the film The Secret.
Gozer Media, for the creation of the superb graphics and for impregnating them with the feeling of The Secret: James Armstrong,
Shamus Hoare, and Andy Lewis.
The CEO of The Secret, Bob Rainone, who was delivered to us from
heaven.
Michael Gardiner and the legal and advisory team across Australia
and the United States.
The Secret website team: Dan Hollings, John Herren, and all at
Powerful Intentions who manage and run The Secret Forum, along
with the wonderful people on the forum.
The great avatars and master teachers from the past, whose writings lit a burning fire of desire within me. I have walked in the
shadows of their greatness, and I honor every one of them. Special
thanks to Robert Collier and Robert Collier Publications, Wallace Wattles, Charles Haanel, Joseph Campbell and the Joseph
Campbell Foundation, Prentice Mulford, Genevieve Behrend, and
Charles Fillmore.
To Richard Cohn and Cynthia Black of Atria Books/Beyond Words,
and Judith Curr of Simon & Schuster, for opening their hearts
and embracing The Secret. For their editing: Henry Covi and Julie
Steigerwaldt.

Acknowledgments

xv

For their generosity in sharing their stories: Cathy Goodman; Susan
Sloate and Colin Halm; Susan Morrice, director of Belize Natural Energy; Jeannie MacKay; and Joe Sugarman.
For their inspirational teachings: Dr. Robert Anthony, Jerry and Esther Hicks and the teachings of Abraham, David Cameron Gikandi,
John Harricharan, Catherine Ponder, Gay and Katie Hendricks,
Stephen MR Covey, Eckhart Tolle, and Debbie Ford. For their generous support: Chris and Janet Attwood, Marcia Martin, members
of the Transformational Leaders Council, the Spiritual Cinema Circle, the staff at Agape Spiritual Center, and the assistants and staff
of all the teachers featured in The Secret.
My precious friends for their love and support: Marcy KoltunCrilley, Margaret Rainone, Athena Golianis and John Walker,
Elaine Bate, Andrea Keir, and Michael and Kendra Abay. And my
amazing family: Peter Byrne; my very special sisters: Jan Child
for her invaluable help with this book, Pauline Vernon, Kaye Izon
(deceased), and Glenda Bell, who is always by my side and whose
love and support knows no limits. My courageous and beautiful mother, Irene Izon, and in memory of my father, Ronald Izon,
whose light and love continue to shine through our lives.
And finally to my daughters, Hayley and Skye Byrne. To Hayley,
who was responsible for the beginning of my life and its true journey, and to Skye, who followed my footsteps in the creation of this
book, and who brilliantly edited and transformed my words. My
daughters are the precious jewels of my life, and they illuminate
every breath I take through their very existence.

BOB PROCTOR
PHILOSOPHER, AUTHOR, AND PERSONAL COACH
The Secret gives you anything you want: happiness,
health, and wealth.

DR. JOE VITALE
METAPHYSICIAN, MARKETING SPECIALIST, AND
AUTHOR
You can have, do, or be anything you want.

JOHN ASSARAF
ENTREPRENEUR AND MONEYMAKING EXPERT
We can have whatever it is that we choose. 1 don't
care how big it is.
4

The Secret

What kind of a house do you want to live in? Do you want
to be a millionaire? What kind of a business do you want to
have? Do you want more success? What do you really want?

DR. JOHN DEMARTINI
PHILOSOPHER, CHIROPRACTOR, HEALER, AND
PERSONAL TRANSFORMATION SPECIALIST
This is the Great Secret of Life.

DR. DENIS WAITLEY
PSYCHOLOGIST AND TRAINER IN THE FIELD OF
MIND POTENTIAL
The leaders in the past who had The Secret wanted
to keep the power and not share the power. They kept
people ignorant of The Secret. People went to work, they
did their job, they came home. They were on a treadmill with
no power, because The Secret was kept in the few.
Throughout history there have been many who coveted the knowledge of The Secret and there have been many who found a way of
spreading this knowledge to the world.

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
VISIONARY AND FOUNDER OF AGAPE
INTERNATIONAL SPIRITUAL CENTER
I've seen many miracles take place in people's lives.

The Secret Revealed

Financial miracles, miracles of physical healing, mental
healing, healing of relationships.

JACK CANFIELD
AUTHOR, TEACHER, LIFE COACH, AND
MOTIVATIONAL SPEAKER
Alt of this happened because of knowing how to
apply The Secret.

BOB PROCTOR
You've probably been sitting there wondering, "What is The
Secret?" ill tell you how I've come to understand it.
We all work with one infinite power. We all guide ourselves
by exactly the same laws. The natural laws of the universe
are so precise that we don't even have any difficulty building
spaceships, we can send people to the moon, and we can time
the landing with the precision of a fraction of a second.
Wherever you are—India, Australia, New Zealand,
Stockholm, London, Toronto, Montreal, or New York—we're
all working with one power. One Law. It's attraction!

3

4

The Secret

The Secret is the law of attraction!
Everything that's coming into your life you are attracting
into your life. And it's attracted to you by virtue of the images
you're holding in your mind. It's what you're thinking.
Whatever is going on in your mind you are attracting to you.
"Every thought of yours is a real thing—a force."

The greatest teachers who have ever lived have told us that the law
of attraction is the most powerful law in the Universe.
Poets such as William Shakespeare, Robert Browning, and William
Blake delivered it in their poetry. Musicians such as Ludwig van
Beethoven expressed it through their music. Artists such as Leonardo da Vinci depicted it in their paintings. Great thinkers including Socrates, Plato, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Pythagoras, Sir Francis
Bacon, Sir Isaac Newton, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, and Victor
Hugo shared it in their writings and teachings. Their names have
been immortalized, and their legendary existence has survived
centuries.
Religions, such as Hinduism, Hermetic traditions, Buddhism,
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and civilizations, such as the
ancient Babylonians and Egyptians, delivered it through their writings and stories. Recorded throughout the ages in all its forms, the

The Secret Revealed

law can be found in ancient writings through all the centuries. It
was recorded in stone in 3000 BC. Even though some coveted this
knowledge, and indeed they did, it has always been there for anyone to discover.
The law began at the beginning of time. It has always been and will
always be.
It is the law that determines the complete order in the Universe,
every moment of your life, and every single thing you experience
in your life. It doesn't matter who you are or where you are, the
law of attraction is forming your entire life experience, and this allpowerful law is doing that through your thoughts. You are the one
who calls the law of attraction into action, and you do it through
your thoughts.
In 1912 Charles Haanel described the law of attraction as "the
greatest and the most infallible law upon which the entire system
of creation depends."
BOB PROCTOR
Wise people have always known this. You can go right back
to the ancient Babylonians. They've always known this. It's a
small select group of people.
The ancient Babylonians and their great prosperity have been
well documented by scholars. They are also known for creating
one of the Seven Wonders of the World, the Hanging Gardens

5

6

The Secret

of Babylon. Through their understanding and application of the
laws of the Universe, they became one of the wealthiest races in
history.
BOB PROCTOR
Why do you think that 1 percent of the population earns
around 96 percent of all the money that's being earned? Do
you think that's an accident? It's designed that way. They
understand something. They understand The Secret, and now
you are being introduced to The Secret.
People who have drawn wealth into their lives used The Secret,
whether consciously or unconsciously. They think thoughts of
abundance and wealth, and they do not allow any contradictory
thoughts to take root in their minds. Their predominant thoughts
are of wealth. They only know wealth, and nothing else exists in
their minds. Whether they are aware of it or not, their predominant
thoughts of wealth are what brought wealth to them. It is the law
of attraction in action.
A perfect example to demonstrate The Secret and the law of attraction in action is this: You may know of people who acquired massive wealth, lost it all, and within a short time acquired massive
wealth again. What happened in these cases, whether they knew
it or n o t is that their dominant thoughts were on wealth; that is
how they acquired it in the first instance. Then they allowed fearful thoughts of losing the wealth to enter their minds, until those
fearful thoughts of loss became their dominant thoughts. They
tipped the scales from thinking thoughts of wealth to thinking

The Secret Revealed

thoughts of loss, and so they lost it all. Once they had lost it however, the fear of loss disappeared, and they tipped the scales back
with dominant thoughts of wealth. And wealth returned.
The law responds to your thoughts, no matter what they may be.

JOHN ASSARAF
The simplest way for me to look at the law of attraction is if
I think of myself as a magnet, and I know that a magnet wilt
attract to it
You are the most powerful magnet in the Universe! You contain a
magnetic power within you that is more powerful than anything
in this world, and this unfathomable magnetic power is emitted
through your thoughts.

BOB DOYLE
BOB DOYLE
AUTHOR AND LAW OF ATTRACTION SPECIALIST
Basically put, the law of attraction says that like attracts
like. But we're really talking at a level of thought.
The law of attraction says like attracts like, and so as you think a
thought, you are also attracting like thoughts to you. Here are more

8

The Secret

examples you may have experienced of the law of attraction in
your life:
Have you ever started to think about something you were not
happy about, and the more you thought about it the worse it
seemed? That's because as you think one sustained thought, the
law of attraction immediately brings more like thoughts to you. In a
matter of minutes, you have gotten so many like unhappy thoughts
coming to you that the situation seems to be getting worse. The
more you think about it, the more upset you get.
You may have experienced attracting like thoughts when you listened to a song, and then found that you couldn't get that song
out of your head. The song just kept playing over and over in your
mind. When you listened to that song, even though you may not
have realized it, you gave your full attention and focus of thought
to it. As you did that, you were powerfully attracting more like
thoughts of that song, and so the law of attraction moved into
action and delivered more thoughts of that song, over and over
again.
JOHN ASSARAF
Our job as humans is to hold on to the thoughts of what we
want, make it absolutely clear in our minds what we want,
and from that we start to invoke one of the greatest laws in the
Universe, and that's the law of attraction. You become what
you think about most but you also attract what you think
about most.

The Secret Revealed

Your life right now is a reflection of your past thoughts. That includes all the great things, and all the things you consider not so
great. Since you attract to you what you think about most, it is easy
to see what your dominant thoughts have been on every subject of
your life, because that is what you have experienced. Until now!
Now you are learning The Secret, and with this knowledge, you
can change everything.
BOB PROCTOR
If you see it in your mind, you're going to hold it in your
hand.
If you can think about what you want in your mind, and make that
your dominant thought, you will bring it into your life.

MIKE DOOLEY
AUTHOR AND INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER
And that principle can be summed up in three simple
words. Thoughts become things!
Through this most powerful law, your thoughts become the things
in your life. Your thoughts become things! Say this over to yourself
and let it seep into your consciousness and your awareness. Your
thoughts become things!
JOHN ASSARAF
What most people don't understand is that a thought has
a frequency. We can measure a thought. And so if you're

9

10

The Secret

thinking that thought over and over and over again, if you're
imagining in your mind having that brand new car, having
the money that you need, building that company, finding your
soul mate... if you're imagining what that looks like, you're
emitting that frequency on a consistent basis.
DR, JOE VITALE
Thoughts are sending out that magnetic signal that is
drawing the parallel back to you.
"The predominant thought or the mental
attitude is the magnet, and the law is that like
attracts like, consequently, the mental attitude
will invariably attract such conditions as
correspond to its nature."

Thoughts are magnetic, and thoughts have a frequency. As you
think, those thoughts are sent out into the Universe, and they
magnetically attract all like things that are on the same frequency.
Everything sent out returns to the source. And that source is
You.
Think of it this way: we understand that a television station's transmission tower broadcasts via a frequency, which is transformed
into pictures on your television. Most of us don't really understand
how it works, but we know that each channel has a frequency,

The Secret Revealed

11

and when we tune into that frequency we see the pictures on our
television. We choose the frequency by selecting the channel, and
we then receive the pictures broadcast on that channel. If we want
to see different pictures on our television, we change the channel
and rune into a new frequency.
You are a human transmission tower, and you are more powerful
than any television tower created on earth. You are the most powerful transmission tower in the Universe. Your transmission creates your life and it creates the world. The frequency you transmit
reaches beyond cities, beyond countries, beyond the world. It reverberates throughout the entire Universe. And you are transmitting that frequency with your thoughts!
The pictures you receive from the transmission of your thoughts
are not on a television screen in your living room, they are the pictures of your life! Your thoughts create the frequency, they attract
like things on that frequency, and then they are broadcast back to
you as your life pictures. If you want to change anything in your
life, change the channel and change the frequency by changing
your thoughts.
"The vibrations of mental forces are the
finest and consequently the most powerful in
existence."

12

The Secret

BOB PROCTOR
See yourself living in abundance and you will attract it. It
works every time, with every person.
As you think of yourself living in abundance, you are powerfully
and consciously determining your life through the law of attraction. It's that easy. But then the most obvious question becomes,
"Why isn't everybody living the life of their dreams?"

JOHN ASSARAF
Here's the problem. Most people are thinking about what they
don't want, and they're wondering why it shows up over and
over again.
The only reason why people do not have what they want is because they are thinking more about what they don't want than
what they do want. Listen to your thoughts, and listen to the
words you are saying. The law is absolute and there are no mistakes.
An epidemic worse than any plague that humankind has ever
seen has been raging for centuries. It is the "don't want" epidemic.

The Secret Revealed

13

People keep this epidemic alive when they predominantly think,
speak, act, and focus on what they "don't want." But this is the
generation that will change history, because we are receiving the
knowledge that can free us of this epidemic! It begins with you,,
and you can become a pioneer of this new thought movement by
simply thinking and speaking about what you want.
BOB DOYLE
The law of attraction doesn't care whether you perceive
something to be good or bad, or whether you don't want it or
whether you do want it. It's res-ponding to your thoughts. So
if you're looking at a mountain of debt, feeling terrible about
it, that's the signal you're putting out into the Universe. "I
feel really bad because of all this debt I've got." You're just
affirming it to yourself. You feel it on every level of your
being. That's what you're going to get more of.
The law of attraction is a law of nature. It is impersonal and it does
not see good things or bad things. It is receiving your thoughts and
reflecting back to you those thoughts as your life experience. The law
of attraction simply gives you whatever it is you are thinking about.

LISA NICHOLS
AUTHORAND PERSONAL EMPOWERMENT
ADVOCATE
The law of attraction is really obedient. When you think of the
things that you want, and you focus on them with all of your
intention, then the law of attraction will give you exactly

14

The Secret

what you want, every time. When you focus on the things
that you don't want — "I don't want to be late, I don't want
to be late"—the law of attraction doesn't hear that you don't
want it. It manifests the things that you're thinking of and
so it's going to show up over and over and over again. The
law of attraction is not biased to wants or don't wants. When
you focus on something, no matter what it happens to be, you
really are calling that into existence.
When you focus your thoughts on something you want, and you
hold that focus, you are in that moment summoning what you
want with the mightiest power in the Universe. The law of attraction doesn't compute "don't" or "not" or "no," or any other words
of negation. As you speak words of negation, this is what the law
of attraction is receiving:
"I don't want to spill something on this outfit."
"I want to spill something on this outfit and I want to spill
more things."
"I don't want a bad haircut."
"I want bad haircuts."
"I don't want to be delayed."
"I want delays."
"I don't want that person to be rude to me."
"I want that person and more people to be rude to me."
"I don't want the restaurant to give away our table."
"I want restaurants to give away our tables."

The Secret Revealed

15

"I don't want these shoes to hurt."
"I want shoes to hurt."
"I can't handle all this work."
"I want more work than I can handle."
"I don't want to catch the flu."
"I want the flu and I want to catch more things."
"I don't want to argue."
"I want more arguing."
"Don't speak to me like that."
"I want you to speak to me like that and I want other people to
speak to me like that."
The law of attraction is giving you what you are thinking about
—period!
BOB PROCTOR
The law of attraction is always working, whether you believe
it or understand it or not.
The law of attraction is the law of creation. Quantum physicists tell
us that the entire Universe emerged from thought! You create your
life through your thoughts and the law of attraction, and every
single person does the same. It doesn't just work if you know about
it. It has always been working in your life and every other person's
life throughout history. When you become aware of this great law,
then you become aware of how incredibly powerful you are, to be
able to THINK your life into existence.

16

The Secret

LISA NICHOLS
It's working as much as you're thinking. Any time your
thoughts are flowing, the law of attraction is working.
When you're thinking about the past, the law of attraction's
working. When you're thinking about the present or the
future, the law of attraction is working. It's an ongoing
process. You don't press pause, you don't press stop. It is
forever in action, as your thoughts are.
Whether we realize it or not, we are thinking most of the time. If
you are speaking or listening to someone, you are thinking. If you
are reading the newspaper or watching television, you are thinking. When you recall memories from your past, you are thinking. When you are considering something in your future, you are
thinking. When you are driving, you are thinking. When you arc
getting ready in the morning, you are thinking. For many of us,
the only time we are not thinking is when we are asleep; however,
the forces of attraction are still operating on our last thoughts as
we fall asleep. Make your last thoughts before going to sleep good
thoughts.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
Creation is always happening. Every time an individual has
a thought, or a prolonged chronic way of thinking, they're in
the creation process. Something is going to manifest out of
those thoughts.
What you are thinking now is creating your future life. You create
your life with your thoughts. Because you are always thinking, you

The Secret Revealed

17

are always creating. What you think about the most or focus on the
most is what will appear as your life.
Like all the laws of nature, there is utter perfection in this law. You create your life. Whatever you sow, you reap! Your thoughts are seeds,
and the harvest you reap will depend on the seeds you plant.
If you are complaining, the law of attraction will powerfully bring
into your life more situations for you to complain about. If you are
listening to someone else complain and focusing on that sympathizing with them, agreeing with them, in that moment, you are
attracting more situations to yourself to complain about.
The law is simply reflecting and giving back to you exactly what
you are focusing on with your thoughts. With this powerful knowledge, you can completely change every circumstance and event in
your entire life, by changing the way you think.

BILL HARRIS
TEACHER AND FOUNDER OF
CENTERPOINTE RESEARCH INSTITUTE
I had a student named Robert, who was taking an
online course I have, part of which entails email access
to me.
Robert was gay. He outlined all of the grim realities of his
life in his emails to me. In his job, his coworkers ganged up
on him. It was constantly stressful because of how nasty

18

The Secret

they were with him. When he walked down the street, he was
accosted by homophobic people who wanted to abuse him in
some way. He wanted to become a stand-up comedian, and
when he did a stand-up comedy job, everybody heckled him
about being gay. His whole life was one of unhappiness and
misery, and it all focused around being attacked because he
was gay.
I began to teach him that he was focusing on what he did not
want. I directed him back to his email that he sent me and
said, "Read it again. Look at all the things you do not want
that you're telling me about. I can tell you're very passionate
about this and when you focus on something with a lot of
passion, it makes it happen even faster!"
Then he started taking this thing about focusing on what
you want to heart, and he began really trying it. What
happened within the next six to eight weeks was an absolute
miracle. All the people in his office who had been harassing
him either transferred to another department, quit working
at the company, or started completely leaving him alone. He
began to love his job. When he walked down the street, nobody
harassed him anymore. They just weren't there. When he did
his stand-up comedy routines he started getting standing
ovations, and nobody was heckling him!
His whole life changed because he changed from focusing on
what he did not want, what he was afraid of, what he wanted
to avoid, to focusing on what he did want.

The Secret Revealed

19

Robert's life changed because he changed his thoughts. He emitted
a different frequency out into the Universe. The Universe must deliver the pictures of the new frequency no matter how impossible
the situation might seem. Robert's new thoughts became his new
frequency, and the pictures of his entire life changed.
Your life is in your hands. No matter where you are now, no matter what has happened in your life, you can begin to consciously
choose your thoughts, and you can change your life. There is no
such thing as a hopeless situation. Every single circumstance of
your life can change!

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
You attract to you the predominant thoughts that you're
holding in your awareness, whether those thoughts are
conscious or unconscious. That's the rub.
Whether you have been aware of your thoughts in the past or not,
now you are becoming aware. Right now, with the knowledge of
The Secret, you are waking up from a deep sleep and becoming
aware! Aware of the knowledge, aware of the law, aware of the
power you have through your thoughts.

20

The Secret

DR JOHN DEMARTINI
If you look very carefully when it comes to The Secret, and the
power of our mind and the power of our intention in our daily
lives, it's all around us. All we have to do is open our eyes and
look.
LISA NICHOLS
You can see the law of attraction everywhere. You draw
everything to yourself. The people, the job, the circumstances, the
health, the wealth, the debt, the joy, the car that you drive, the
community that you're in. And you've drawn them all to you,
like a magnet. What you think about you bring about Your whole
life is a manifestation of the thoughts that go on in your head.
This is a Universe of inclusion, not exclusion. Nothing is excluded
from the law of attraction. Your life is a mirror of the dominant
thoughts you think. All living things on this planet operate through
the law of attraction. The difference with humans is that they have
a mind that can discern. They can use their free will to choose their
thoughts. They have the power to intentionally think and create
their entire life with their mind.

DR. FRED ALAN WOLF
QUANTUM PHYSICIST, LECTURER,
AND AWARD-WINNING AUTHOR
I'm not talking to you from the point of view of
wishful thinking or imaginary craziness. I'm
talking to you from a deeper, basic understanding.

The Secret Revealed

21

Quantum physics really begins to point to this discovery. It
says that you can't have a Universe without mind entering
into it, and that the mind is actually shaping the very thing
that is being perceived.
If you think about the analogy of being the most powerful transmission tower in the Universe, you will see the perfect correlation
with Dr. Wolf's words. Your mind thinks thoughts and the pictures
are broadcast back as your life experience. You not only create your
life with your thoughts, but your thoughts add powerfully to the
creation of the world, If you thought that you were insignificant
and had no power in this world, think again. Your mind is actually
shaping the world around you.
The amazing work and discoveries of the quantum physicists
over the last eighty years has brought us to a greater understanding of the unfathomable power of the human mind to create.
Their work parallels the words of the world's great minds, including Carnegie, Emerson, Shakespeare, Bacon, Krishnamurti,
and Buddha.
BOB PROCTOR
If you don't understand the law that doesn't mean you should
reject it. You may not understand electricity, and yet you
enjoy the benefits of it. I don't know how it works. But I do
knew this: You can cook a man's dinner with electricity, and
you can also cook the man!

22

The Secret

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
Oftentimes when people begin to understand the Great Secret,
they become frightened of all the negative thoughts that they
have. They need to be aware that it has been scientifically
proven that an affirmative thought is hundreds of times more
powerful than a negative thought. That eliminates a degree of
worry right there.
It really does take many negative thoughts and persistent negative
thinking to bring something negative into your life. However, if
you persist in thinking negative thoughts over a period of time,
they will appear in your life. If you worry about having negative
thoughts, you will attract more worrying about your negative
thoughts, and multiply them at the same time. Decide right now
that you are going to think only good thoughts. At the same time,
proclaim to the Universe that all your good thoughts are powerful,
and that any negative thoughts are weak.
LISA NICHOLS

Thank God that there's a time delay, that all of your
thoughts don't come true instantly. We'd be in trouble if
they did. The element of time delay serves you. It allows
you to reassess, to think about what you want, and to make
a new choice.
All of your power to create your life is available right now, because
right now is when you are thinking. If you have had some thoughts
that will not be beneficial when they manifest, then right now you
can change your thinking. You can erase your previous thoughts by

The Secret Revealed

23

replacing them with good thoughts. Time serves you because you
can think new thoughts and emit a new frequency, now!
DR. JOE VITALE
You want to become aware of your thoughts and choose your
thoughts carefully and you want to have fun with this, because you
are the masterpiece of your own life. You are the Michelangelo of
your own life. The David you are sculpting is you.

One way to master your mind is to learn to quiet your mind. Without exception, every teacher in this book uses meditation as a daily
practice. It wasn't until I discovered The Secret that I realized how
powerful meditation can be. Meditation quiets your mind, helps
you control your thoughts, and revitalizes your body. The great
news is that you don't have to set aside hours to meditate. Just
three to ten minutes a day to begin with, can be incredibly powerful for gaining control over your thoughts.
To become aware of your thoughts, you can also set the intention,
"I am the master of my thoughts." Say it often, meditate on it, and
as you hold to that intention, by the law of attraction you must
become that.
You are now receiving the knowledge that will enable you to create
the most magnificent version of You. The possibility of that version
of you already exists on the frequency of "the most magnificent
version of You." Decide what you want to be, do, and have, think
the thoughts of it, emit the frequency, and your vision will become
your life.

• The Great Secret of Life is the law of attraction.
• The law of attraction says like attracts like, so when you think a
thought, you are also attracting like thoughts to you.
• Thoughts are magnetic, and thoughts have a frequency. As you think
thoughts, they are sent out into the Universe, and they magnetically
attract all like things that are on the same frequency. Everything sent
out returns to the source—you.
• You are like a human transmission tower, transmitting a frequency
with your thoughts. If you want to change anything in your life,
change the frequency by changing your thoughts.
• Your current thoughts are creating your future life. What you think
about the most or focus on the most will appear as your life.
• Your thoughts become things.

25

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH

We live in a universe in which there are laws, just as there is
a law of gravity. If you fail off a building it doesn't matter if
you're a good person or a had person, you're going to hit the
ground.
The law of attraction is a law of nature. It is as impartial and impersonal as the law of gravity is. It is precise, and it is exact
DR. JOE VlTALE

Everything that surrounds you right now in your life,
including the things you're complaining about, you've
attracted. Now I know at first blush that's going to
be something that you hate to hear. You're going to
immediately say, "I didn't attract the car accident. I didn't
attract this particular client who gives me a hard time. I
didn't particularly attract the debt." And I'm here to be
27

The Secret

a little bit in your face and to say, yes you did attract it.
This is one of the hardest concepts to get, but once you've
accepted it, it's life transforming.
Often when people first hear this part of the Secret they recall
events in history where masses of lives were lost, and they find
it incomprehensible that so many people could have attracted
themselves to the event. By the law of attraction, they had to be on
the same frequency as the event. It doesn't necessarily mean they
thought of that exact event, but the frequency of their thoughts
matched the frequency of the event. If people believe they can be
in the wrong place at the wrong time, and they have no control
over outside circumstances, those thoughts of fear, separation, and
powerlessness, if persistent, can attract them to being in the wrong
place at the wrong time.
You have a choice right now. Do you want to believe that it's just
the luck of the draw and bad things can happen to you at any time?
Do you want to believe that you can be in the wrong place at the
wrong time? That you have no control over circumstances?
Or do you want to believe and know that your life experience is in
your hands and that only all good can come into your life because
that is the way you think? You have a choice, and whatever you
choose to think will become your life experience.
Nothing can come into your experience unless you summon it
through persistent thoughts.

The Secret Made Simple

29

BOB DOYLE

Most of us attract by default. We just think that we don't
have any control over it. Our thoughts and feelings are on
autopilot, and so everything is brought to us by default.
No one would ever deliberately attract anything unwanted.
Without the knowledge of The Secret, it is easy to see how some
unwanted things may have occurred in your life or other people's
lives. It simply came from a lack of awareness of the great creative
power of our thoughts.
DR. JOE VlTALE
Now if this is your first time to hear this, it may feel like,
"Oh, I have to monitor my thoughts? This is going to be a lot
of work." It will seem like that at first, but that's where the
fun begins.
The fun is that there are many shortcuts to The Secret, and you get
to choose the shortcuts that work best for you. Read on, and you'll
see how.

MARCI SHIMOFF
AUTHOR, INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER, AND
TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADER
It's impossible to monitor every thought we have.
Researchers tell us that we have about sixty thousand
thoughts a day. Can you imagine how exhausted you'd

30 The Secret
feel trying to control all sixty thousand of those thoughts?
Fortunately there's an easier way, and it's our feelings. Our
feelings let us know what we're thinking.
The importance of feelings cannot be overstated. Your feelings are
your greatest tool to help you create your life. Your thoughts are
the primary cause of everything. Everything else you see and experience in this world is effect, and that includes your feelings. The
cause is always your thoughts.
BOB DOYLE

/ The emotions are an incredible gift that we have to let us
know what we're thinking.
Your feelings tell you very quickly what you're thinking. Think
about when your feelings suddenly took a dive—maybe when you
heard some bad news. That feeling in your stomach or solar plexus
was instant. So your feelings are an immediate signal for you to
know what you are thinking.
You want to become aware of how you're feeling, and get in tune
with how you're feeling, because it is the fastest way for you to
know what you're thinking.
LISA NICHOLS
You have two sets of feelings: good feelings and bad feelings.
And you know the difference between the two because one
makes you feel good, and the other makes you feel bad. It's the
depression, it's the anger, it's the resentment, it's the guilt. It's

The Secret Made Simple

31

those feelings that don't make you feel empowered. Those are
the bad feelings.
No one can tell you whether you are feeling good or bad, because
you are the only one who knows how you're feeling at any time. If
you're not sure how you're feeling, just ask yourself, "How am I
feeling?" You can stop and ask this question often during the day,
and as you do you will become more aware of how you're feeling.
The most important thing for you to know is that it is impossible
to feel bad and at the same time be having good thoughts. That
would defy the law, because your thoughts cause your feelings. If
you are feeling bad, it is because you are thinking thoughts that are
making you feel bad.
Your thoughts determine your frequency, and your feelings tell you
immediately what frequency you are on. When you are feeling bad,
you are on the frequency of drawing more bad things. The law of
attraction must respond by broadcasting back to you more pictures
of bad things and things that will make you feel bad.
As you feel bad, and don't make any effort to change your thoughts
and feel better, you are in effect saying, "Bring me more circumstances that will make me feel bad. Bring it on!"
LISA NICHOLS
The flipside to that is that you have good emotions and good
feelings. You know when they come because they make you
feel good. Excitement, joy, gratitude, love. Imagine if we could

32

The Secret

feel that way every day. When you celebrate the good feelings,
you'll draw to you more good feelings, and things that make
you feel good.
BOB DOYLE
It's really so simple. "What am I attracting right now? " Well,
how do you feel? "I feel good." Well good, keep doing that.
It is impossible to feel good and at the same time be having negative thoughts. If you are feeling good, it is because you are thinking
good thoughts. You see, you can have whatever you want in your
life, no limits. But there's one catch: You have to feel good. And
when you think about it, isn't that all you ever want? The law is
indeed perfect.
MARCLSHIMOFF
If you're feeling good, then you're creating a future that's on
track with your desires. If you're feeling bad, you're creating
a future that's off track with your desires. As you go about
your day, the law of attraction is working in every second.
Everything we think and feel is creating our future. If you're
worried or in fear, then you're bringing more of that into your
life throughout the day.
When you are feeling good, you must be thinking good thoughts.
So you are on track and you are emitting a powerful frequency that
is attracting back to you more good things that will make you feel
good. Seize those moments when you are feeling good, and milk

The Secret Made Simple

33

them. Be aware that as you are feeling good, you are powerfully
attracting more good things to you.
Let's go one step further. What if your feelings are actually communication from the Universe to let you know what you're thinking?
JACKCANFIELD
Our feelings are a feedback mechanism to us about whether
we're on track or not, whether we're on course or off course.
Remember that your thoughts are the primary cause of everything.
So when you think a sustained thought it is immediately sent out
into the Universe. That thought magnetically attaches itself to the
like frequency and then within seconds sends the reading of that
frequency back to you through your feelings. Put another way,
your feelings are communication back to you from the Universe,
telling you what frequency you are currently on. Your feelings are
your frequency feedback mechanism!
When you are feeling good feelings, it is communication back from
the Universe saying, "You are thinking good thoughts" Likewise,
when you are feeling bad, you are receiving communication back
from the Universe saying, "You are thinking bad thoughts."
So when you are feeling bad it is communication from the Universe, and in effect it is saying, "Warning! Change thinking now.
Negative frequency recording. Change frequency. Counting down
to manifestation. Warning!"

34

The Secret

The next time you are feeling bad or feeling any negative emotion,
listen to the signal you are receiving from the Universe. In that
moment you are blocking your own good from coming to you because you are on a negative frequency. Change your thoughts and
think about something good, and when the good feelings start
to come you will know it was because You shifted yourself on to
a new frequency, and the Universe has confirmed it with better
feelings.
BOB DOYLE
You 're getting exactly what you're feeling about, not so much
what you're thinking about.
That's why people tend to spiral if they stub their toe getting
out of bed. Their whole day goes like that. They have no clue
that a simple shifting of their emotions can change their entire
day—and life.
If you start out having a good day and you're in that particular
happy feeling, as long as you don't allow something to change
your mood, you're going to continue to attract, by the law of
attraction, more situations and people that sustain that happy
feeling.
We all have experienced those days or times when one thing after
another goes wrong. The chain reaction began with one thought,
whether you were aware of it or not. The one bad thought attracted
more bad thoughts, the frequency locked in, and eventually something went wrong. Then as you reacted to that one thing going

The Secret Made Simple

35

wrong, you attracted more things going wrong. Reactions just attract more of the same, and the chain reaction must keep occurring
until you move yourself off that frequency by intentionally changing your thoughts.
You can shift your thoughts to what you want receive confirmation through your feelings that you changed your frequency, and
the law of attraction will grab hold of that new frequency and send
it back to you as the new pictures of your life.
Now here is where you can harness your feelings and use them to
turbo-charge what you want in your life.
You can purposefully use your feelings to transmit an even more
powerful frequency, by adding feeling to what you are wanting.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
You can begin right now to feel healthy. You can begin to feel
prosperous. You can begin to feet the love that's surrounding
you, even if it's not there. And what will happen is the
universe will correspond to the nature of your song. The
universe will correspond to the nature of that inner feeling
and manifest, because that's the way you feel.
So what are you feeling now? Take a few moments to think about
how you feel. If you're not feeling as good as you'd like to, focus
on feeling your feelings inside and purposefully lift them. As you
focus intensely on your feelings, with the intention to lift yourself,
you can powerfully elevate them. One way is to close your eyes

36

The Secret

(shutting out distractions), focus on your feelings inside, and smile
for one minute.
LISA N I C H O L S

Your thoughts and your feelings create your life. It will
always be that way. Guaranteed!
Just like the law of gravity, the law of attraction never slips up.
You don't see pigs flying because the law of gravity made a mistake and forgot to apply gravity to pigs that day. Likewise, there
are no exclusions to the law of attraction. If something came to
you, you drew it, with prolonged thought. The law of attraction
is precise.
M I C H A E L B E R N A R D BECKWITH

It's hard to swallow, but when we can begin to open ourselves
up to that, the ramifications are awesome. It means that
whatever thought has done in your life, it can be undone
through a shift in your awareness.
You have the power to change anything, because you are the one
who chooses your thoughts and you are the one who feels your
feelings.
'You create your own universe as you go along."

The Secret Made Simple
D R . JOE VITALE

It's really important that you feel good, because this feeling
good is what goes out as a signal into the Universe and starts
to attract more of itself to you. So the more you can feel good,
the more you will attract the things that help you feel good,
and are able to keep bringing you up higher and higher.
BOB PROCTOR
When you're feeling down, did you know that you can change
it in an instant? Put on a beautiful piece of music, or start
singing—that'll change your emotion. Or think of something
beautiful. Think of a baby or somebody that you truly love,
and dwell on it. Really keep that thought in your mind. Block
every thing out but that thought. I guarantee you'll start to
feel good.
Make a list of some Secret Shifters to have up your sleeve. By
Secret Shifters, I mean things that can change your feelings in a
snap. It might be beautiful memories, future events, funny moments, nature, a person you love, your favorite music. Then if you
find yourself angry or frustrated or not feeling good, turn to your
Secret Shifters list and focus on one of them. Different things will
shift you at different times, so if one doesn't work, go to another. It
only takes a minute or two of changing focus to shift yourself and
shift your frequency.

38

The Secret

JAMES RAY
PHILOSOPHER, LECTURER, AUTHOR, AND
CREATOR OF PROSPERITY AND HUMAN
POTENTIAL PROGRAMS

The principle of feeling good applies to your family
pets, for instance. Animals are wonderful, because they put
you in a great emotional state. When you feel love for your
pet, that great state of love will bring goodness into your life.
And what a gift that is.
"It is the combination of thought and love
which forms the irresistible force of the law of
attraction."

There is no greater power in the Universe than the power of love.
The feeling of love is the highest frequency you can emit. If you
could wrap every thought in love, if you could love everything and
everyone, your life would be transformed.
In fact, some of the great thinkers of the past referred to the law
of attraction as the law of love. And if you think about it, you will
understand why. If you think unkind thoughts about someone else,

The Secret Made Simple

39

you will experience those unkind thoughts manifested. You cannot
harm another with your thoughts, you only harm You. If you think
thoughts of love, guess who receives the benefits—you! So if your
predominant state is love, the law of attraction or the law of love
responds with the mightiest force because you are on the highest
frequency possible. The greater the love you feel and emit, the
greater the power you are harnessing.

"The principle which gives the thought the
dynamic power to correlate with its object,
and therefore to master every adverse human
experience, is the law of attraction, which is
another name for love. This is an eternal and
fundamental principle inherent in all things, in
every system of philosophy, in every Religion
and in every Science. There is no getting away
from the law of love. It is feeling that imparts
vitality to thought. Feeling is desire and desire is
love. Thought impregnated with love becomes
invincible."

MARCI SHIMOFF
Once you begin to understand and truly master your
thoughts and feelings, that's when you see how you create
your own reality. That's where your freedom is, that's where
all your power is.

40

The Secret

Marci Shimoff shared a wonderful quote from the great Albert
Einstein: "The most important question any human being can ask
themselves is, 'Is this a friendly Universe?'"
Knowing the law of attraction, the only answer to give is, "Yes,
the Universe is friendly." Why? Because when you answer in this
way, by the law of attraction you must experience that. Albert Einstein posed this powerful question because he knew The Secret.
He knew by asking the question it would force us to think and
make a choice. He gave us a great opportunity, just by posing the
question.
To take Einstein's intention even further, you can affirm and proclaim, "This is a magnificent Universe. The Universe is bringing all
good things to me. The Universe is conspiring for me in all things.
The Universe is supporting me in everything I do. The Universe
meets all my needs immediately." Know that this is a friendly Universe!

J

ACKCANFlELD
Since I learned The Secret and started applying it to my life,
my life has truly become magical. I think the kind of life that
everybody dreams of is one I live on a day-to-day basis. I live
in a four-and-a-half-million-dollar mansion. I have a wife to
die for. I get to vacation in all the fabulous spots of the world.
I've climbed mountains. I've explored. I've been on safaris.
And all of this happened, and continues to happen, because
of knowing how to apply The Secret.

The Secret Made Simple

41

BOB PROCTOR

Life can be absolutely phenomenal, and it should be, and it
will be, when you start using The Secret.
This is your life, and it's been waiting for you to discover it! Up
until now you may have been thinking that life is hard and a struggle, and so by the law of attraction you will have experienced life
as hard and a struggle. Begin right now to shout to the universe,
"Life is so easy! Life is so good! All good things come to me!"
There is a truth deep down inside of you that has been waiting
for you to discover it, and that Truth is this: you deserve all good
things life has to offer. You know that inherently, because you feel
awful when you are experiencing the lack of good things. All
good things are your birthright! You are the creator of you, and
the law of attraction is your magnificent tool to create whatever
you want in your life. Welcome to the magic of life, and the magnificence of You!

The law of attraction is a law of nature. It is as impartial as the law
of gravity.
Nothing can come into your experience unless you summon it
through persistent thoughts.
To know what you're thinking, ask yourself how you are feeling.
Emotions are valuable tools that instantly tell us what we are
thinking.
It is impossible to feel bad and at the same time have good thoughts.
Your thoughts determine your frequency, and your feelings tell you
immediately what frequency you are on. When you feel bad, you
are on the frequency of drawing more bad things. When you feel
good, you are powerfully attracting more good things to you.
Secret Shifters, such as pleasant memories, nature, or your favorite
music, can change your feelings and shift your frequency in an instant.
The feeling of love is the highest frequency you can emit. The greater
the love you feel and emit, the greater the power you are harnessing.

43

You are a creator, and there is an easy process to create using the
law of attraction. The greatest teachers and avatars have shared
the Creative Process through their wondrous work, in a myriad of
forms. Some great teachers created stories to demonstrate how the
Universe works. The wisdom contained in their stories has been
handed down through the centuries and has become legendary.
Many people living today do not realize that the essence of these
stories is the very truth of life.
JAMES

RAY

If you think about Aladdin and his lamp, Aladdin picks up the
lamp, dusts it off, and out pops the Genie. The Genie always
says one thing:
"Your wish is my command!"
The story now goes that there are three wishes, hut if you
45

46

The Secret

trace the story back to its origins there's absolutely no limit
whatsoever to the wishes.
Think about that one.
Now, let's take this metaphor and apply it to your life.
Remember Aladdin is the one who always asks for what he
wants. Then you've got the Universe at large, which is the
Genie. Traditions have called it so many things—your holy
guardian angel, your higher self. We can put any label on
it, and you choose the one that works best for you, but every
tradition has told us there's something bigger than us. And
the Genie always says one thing:
"Your wish is my command!"
This wonderful story demonstrates how your whole life and everything in it has been created by You. The Genie has simply answered your every command. The Genie is the law of attraction,
and it is always present and always listening to everything you
think, speak, and act. The Genie assumes that everything you
think about, you want! That everything you speak about, you
want! That everything you act upon is what you want! You are the
Master of the Universe, and the Genie is there to serve you. The
Genie never questions your commands. You think it, and the Genie
immediately begins to leverage the Universe, through people, circumstances, and events, to fulfill your wish.

How to Use the Secret

47

The Creative Process used in The Secret, which was taken from the
New Testament in the Bible, is an easy guideline for you to create
what you want in three simple steps.

LISA NICHOLS

The first step is to ask. Make a command to the Universe. Let the
Universe know what you want. The Universe responds to your
thoughts.
BOB

PROCTOR

What do you really want? Sit down and write it out on a
piece of paper. Write it in the present tense. You might begin
by writing, "I am so happy and grateful now that..." And
then explain how you want your life to be, in every area.
You get to choose what you want, but you must get clear about
what you want. This is your work. If you're not clear, then the law
of attraction cannot bring you what you want. You will be sending
out a mixed frequency and you can only attract mixed results. For
the first time in your life perhaps, work out what it is you really
want. Now that you know you can have, be, or do anything, and
there are no limits, what do you want?

48

The Secret

Asking is the first step in the Creative Process, so make it a habit to
ask. If you have to make a choice and you don't know which way
to go, ask! You should never be stumped on anything in your life.
Just ask!
DR. JOE VlTALE
This is really fun. It's like having the Universe as your
catalogue. You flip through it and say, "I'd like to have this
experience and I'd like to have that product and I'd like to
have a person like that." It is You placing your order with the
Universe. It's really that easy.
You do not have to ask over and over again. Just ask once. It is
exactly like placing an order from a catalogue. You only ever order
something once. You don't place an order and then doubt the order
has been received and so place the order again, and then again, and
then again. You order once. It is the same with the Creative Process.
Step One is simply your step to get clear about what you want. As
you get clear in your mind, you have asked.

LISA NICHOLS
Step two is believe. Believe that it's already yours. Have what
I love to call unwavering faith. Believing in the unseen.

How to Use the Secret

49

You must believe that you have received. You must know that what
you want is yours the moment you ask. You must have complete
and utter faith. If you had placed an order from a catalogue you
would relax/ know you are going to receive what you ordered, and
get on with your life.
"See the things that you want as already yours.
Know that they will come to you at need. Then
let them come. Don't fret and worry about them.
Don't think about your lack of them. Think of
them as yours, as belonging to you, as already in
your possession."

In the moment you ask, and believe and know you already have it
in the unseen, the entire Universe shifts to bring it into the seen.
You must act, speak, and think, as though you are receiving it now.
Why? The Universe is a mirror, and the law of attraction is mirroring back to you your dominant thoughts. So doesn't it make
sense that you have to see yourself as receiving it? If your thoughts
contain noticing you do not have it yet, you will continue to attract not having it yet. You must believe you have it already. You
must believe you have received it. You have to emit the feeling
frequency of having received it, to bring those pictures back as
your life. When you do that, the law of attraction will powerfully
move all circumstances, people, and events, for you to receive.

50

The Secret

When you book a vacation, order a brand new car, or buy a house,
you know those things are yours. You wouldn't go and book another vacation for the same time, or purchase another car or house.
If you won a lottery or received a large inheritance, even before
you physically had the money, you know it is yours. That is the
feeling of believing it is yours. That is the feeling of believing you
have it already. That is the feeling of believing you have received.
Claim the things you want by feeling and believing they are yours.
When you do that, the law of attraction will powerfully move all
circumstances, people, and events for you to receive.
How do you get yourself to a point of believing? Start makebelieving. Be like a child, and make-believe. Act as if you have it
already. As you make-believe, you will begin to believe you have
received. The Genie is responding to your predominant thoughts
all the time, not just in the moment you ask. That's why after
you've asked, you must continue to believe and know. Have faith.
Your belief that you have it, that undying faith, is your greatest
power. When you believe you are receiving, get ready, and watch
the magic begin!

"You can have what you want—if you know
how to form the mold for it in your own
thoughts. There is no dream that may not come
true, if you but learn to use the Creative Force
working through you. The methods that work
for one will work for all. The key to power lies in
using what you have . . . freely, fully . . . and thus

How to Use the Secret

51

opening wide your channels for more Creative
Force to flow through you/'

DR. JOE VlTALE

The Universe will start to rearrange itself to make it happen
for you.
JACKCANFIELD
Most of us have never allowed ourselves to want what we
truly want, because toe can't see how it's going to manifest.
BOB PROCTOR

If you do just a little research, it is going to become evident
to you that anyone that ever accomplished anything, did not
know how they were going to do it. They only knew they were
going to do it.
DR. JOE VlTALE

You don't need to know how it's going to come about You
don't need to know how the Universe will rearrange itself
How it will happen, how the Universe will bring it to you, is not
your concern or job. Allow the Universe to do it for you. When
you are trying to work out how it will happen, you are emitting a
frequency that contains a lack of faith—that you don't believe you
have it already. You think you have to do it and you do not believe
the Universe will do it for you. The how is not your part in the
Creative Process.

52

The Secret

BOB PROCTOR
You don't know how, it will be shown to you. You will attract
the way.
LISA NICHOLS

Most of the time, when we don't see the things that we've
requested, we get frustrated. We get disappointed. And we
begin to become doubtful. The doubt brings about a feeling of
disappointment. Take that doubt and shift it. Recognize that
feeling and replace it with a feeling of unwavering faith. "I
know that it's on its way."

LISA N I C H O L S

Step three, and the final step in the process, is to receive.
Begin to feel wonderful about it. Feel the way you Will feel
once it arrives. Feel it now.
M A R C I SHIMOFF

And in this process it's important to feel good, to be happy,
because when you're feeling good you're putting yourself in
the frequency of what you want.
M I C H A E L BERNARD BECKWITH

This is a feeling Universe. If you just intellectually believe
something, but you have no corresponding feeling underneath

How to Use the Secret

53

that, you don't necessarily have enough power to manifest
what you want in your life. You have to feel it.
Ask once, believe you have received, and all you have to do to
receive is feel good. When you are feeling good, you are on the
frequency of receiving. You are on the frequency of all good things
coming to you, and you will receive what you have asked for. You
wouldn't ask for anything unless it was going to make you feel
good in the receiving of it, would you? So get yourself on the feelgood frequency, and you will receive.
A fast way to get yourself on that frequency is to say, "I am receiving now. I am receiving all the good in my life, now, I am receiving
[fill in your desire] now." And feel it. Feel it as though you have
received.
A dear friend of mine, Marcy, is one of the greatest manifestors I
have seen, and she feels everything. She feels what it would feel like
to have what she is asking for. She feels everything into existence.
She doesn't get caught up in how, when, or where, she Just feels it
and it then manifests.
So feel good now.

BOB PROCTOR
When you turn that fantasy into a fact, you're in the position
to build bigger and bigger fantasies. And that, my friend, is
the Creative Process.

54

The Secret

"Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive."'

"What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them."

BOB DOYLE
The law of attraction, the study and practice of the law of
attraction, is just figuring out what will help you generate
the feelings of having it now. Go test drive that car. Go shop
for that home. Get in the house. Do whatever you have to do
to generate the feelings of having it now, and remember them.
Whatever you can do to achieve that will help you to literally
attract it.
When you feel as though you have it now, and the feeling is so real
that it is like you have it already, you are believing that you have
received/ and you will receive.
BOB DOYLE
It could be you wake up and it's just there. It's manifested. Or,
you might get some inspired idea of some action to take. You
certainly shouldn't be saying, "Well, I could do it this way,
but man, I would hate that." You 're not on the right track if
that's the case.

How to Use the Secret

55

Action will sometimes be required, but if you're really doing
it in line with what the Universe is trying to bring to you, it's
going to feel joyous. You're going to feel so alive. Time will
just stop. You could do it all day.
Action is a word that can imply "work" to some people, but inspired action will not feel like work at all. The difference between
inspired action and action is this: Inspired action is when you are
acting to receive. If you are in action to try and make it happen,
you have slipped backward. Inspired action is effortless, and it
feels wonderful because you are on the frequency of receiving.
Imagine life as a fast-moving riven When you are acting to make
something happen it will feel as if you are going against the current
of the river. It will feel hard and like a struggle. When you are acting to receive from the Universe, you will feel as if you are flowing
with the current of the river. It will feel effortless. That is the feeling of inspired action, and of being in the flow of the Universe and
life.
Sometimes you will not even be aware you used "action" until
after you've received, because the acting felt so good. You will then
look back and see the wonder and matrix of how the Universe carried you to what you wanted, and also brought what you wanted
to you.
DR. JOE VlTALE
The Universe likes speed. Don't delay. Don't second guess.
Don't doubt. When the opportunity is there, when the impulse

56

The Secret

is there, when the intuitive nudge from within is there, act.
That's your job. And that's all you have to do.
Trust your instincts. It's the Universe inspiring you. It's the Universe
communicating with you on the receiving frequency. If you have an
intuitive or instinctive feeling, follow it, and you will find that the
Universe is magnetically moving you to receive what you asked for.
BOB PROCTOR

You will attract everything that you require. If it's money you
need you will attract it. If it's people you need you'll attract
it. If it's a certain book you need you'll attract it. You've got
to pay attention to what you're attracted to, because as you
hold images of what you want, you're going to be attracted to
things and they're going to be attracted to you. But it literally
moves into physical reality with and through you. And it does
that by law.
Remember that you are a magnet, attracting everything to you.
When you have gotten clear in your mind about what you want
you have become a magnet to draw those things to you, and those
things you want are magnetized to you in return. The more you
practice and begin to see the law of attraction bringing things to
you, the greater the magnet you will become, because you will add
the power of faith, belief, and knowing.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH

You can start with nothing, and out of nothing and out of no
way, a way will be made.

How to Use the Secret

57

All you require is You, and your ability to think things into being.
Everything that has been invented and created throughout the
history of humankind began with one thought. From that one
thought a way was made, and it manifested from the invisible
into the visible.
JACK CANFIELD
Think of a car driving through the night The headlights only
go a hundred to two hundred feet forward, and you can make
it all the way from California to New York driving through
the dark, because all you have to see is the next two hundred
feet. And that's how life tends to unfold before us. If we just
trust that the next two hundred feet will unfold after that,
and the next two hundred feet will unfold after that, your
life will keep unfolding. And it will eventually get you to
the destination of whatever it is you truly want, because you
want it.
Trust the Universe. Trust and believe and have faith. I truly had no
idea how I was going to bring the knowledge of The Secret onto
the movie screen. I just held to the outcome of the vision, I saw the
outcome clearly in my mind, I felt it with all my might, and everything that we needed to create The Secret came to us.
"Take the first step in faith. You don't have to see
the whole staircase. Just take the first step."

58

The Secret

Let's look at using the Creative Process for those who feel they are
overweight and who want to lose weight.
The first thing to know is that if you focus on losing weight, you
will attract back having to lose more weight so get "having to lose
weight" out of your mind. It's the very reason why diets don't
work. Because you are focused on losing weight, you must attract
back continually having to lose weight.
The second thing to know is that the condition of being overweight was created through your thought to it. To put it in the most
basic terms, if someone is overweight, it came from thinking "fat
thoughts/' whether that person was aware of it or not. A person cannot think "thin thoughts" and be fat. It completely defies the law of
attraction.
Whether people have been told they have a slow thyroid, a slow
metabolism, or their body size is hereditary, these are all disguises
for thinking "fat thoughts." If you accept any of those conditions as
applicable to you, and you believe it, it must become your experience, and you will continue to attract being overweight.
After I had my two daughters I was overweight, and I know it
came from listening to and reading the messages that it is hard to
lose weight after having a baby, and even harder after the second
baby. I summoned exactly that to me with those "fat thoughts,"

How to Use the Secret

59

and it became my experience. I really "beefed up," and the more I
noticed how I had "beefed up," the more "beefing up" I attracted.
With a small frame, I became a hefty 143 pounds, all because I was
thinking "fat thoughts."
The most common thought that people hold, and I held it too, is
that food was responsible for my weight gain. That is a belief that
does not serve you, and in my mind now it is complete balderdash!
Food is not responsible for putting on weight. It is your thought that
food is responsible for putting on weight that actually has food put
on weight. Remember, thoughts are primary cause of everything,
and the rest is effects from those thoughts. Think perfect thoughts
and the result must be perfect weight.
Let go of all those limiting thoughts. Food cannot cause you to put
on weight unless you think it can.
The definition of the perfect weight is the weight that feels good for
you. No one else's opinion counts. It is the weight that feels good
for you.
You most likely know of someone who is thin and eats like a horse,
and they proudly declare, "I can eat whatever I want and I am always the perfect weight." And so the Genie of the Universe says,
"Your wish is my command!"
To attract your perfect weight and body using the Creative Process,
follow these steps:

60

The Secret

Get clear on the weight you want to be. Have a picture in your
mind of what you will look like when you have become that perfect weight. Get pictures of yourself at your perfect weight, if you
have them, and look at them often. If not, get pictures of the body
you would like to have and look at those often.

You must believe you will receive and that the perfect weight is
yours already. You must imagine, pretend, act as if, make-believe,
that the perfect weight is yours. You must see yourself as receiving
that perfect weight.
Write out your perfect weight and place it over the readout of your
scale, or don't weigh yourself at all. Do not contradict what you
have asked for with your thoughts, words, and actions. Don't buy
clothes at your current weight. Have faith and focus on the clothes
you are going to buy. Attracting the perfect weight is the same
as placing an order with the catalogue of the Universe. You look
through the catalogue, choose the perfect weight, place your order,
and then it is delivered to you.
Make it your intention to look for, admire, and inwardly praise
people with your idea of perfect-weight bodies. Seek them out and

How to Use the Secret

61

as you admire them and feel the feelings of that—you are summoning it to you. If you see people who are overweight, do not observe
them, but immediately switch your mind to the picture of you in
your perfect body and feel it.

You must feel good. You must feel good about You. This is important, because you cannot attract your perfect weight if you feel bad
about your body now. If you feel bad about your body, that is a
powerful feeling, and you will continue to attract feeling bad about
your body. You will never change your body if you are critical of
it and find fault with it, and in fact you will attract more weight to
you. Praise and bless every square inch of your body. Think about
all the perfect things about You. As you think perfect thoughts, as
you feel good about You, you are on the frequency of your perfect
weight, and you are summoning perfection.
Wallace Wattles shares a wonderful tip about eating in one of his
books. He recommends that when you eat, make sure you are entirely focused on the experience of chewing the food. Keep your
mind present and experience the sensation of eating food, and
do not allow your mind to drift to other things. Be present in
your body and enjoy all the sensations of chewing the food in
your mouth and swallowing it. Try it the next time you are eating. When you are completely present as you eat, the flavor of the
food is so intense and magnificent; when you let your mind drift.

62

The Secret

the flavor virtually disappears. I am convinced that if we can eat
our food in the present, entirely focused on the pleasurable experience of eating, the food is assimilated into our bodies perfectly,
and the result in our bodies must be perfection.
The end of the story about my own weight is that I now maintain
my perfect weight of 116 pounds and I can eat whatever I want. So,
focus on your perfect weight!

DR. JOE VlTALE
Another thing people wonder about is, "How long will it take
to manifest the car, the relationship, the money?" I don't have
any rulebook that says it's going to take thirty minutes or
three days or thirty days. It's more a matter of you being in
alignment with the Universe itself.
Time is just an illusion. Einstein told us that. If this is the first time
you have heard it, you may find it a hard concept to get your head
around, because you see everything happening—one thing after
the other. What quantum physicists and Einstein tell us is that everything is happening simultaneously. If you can understand that
there is no time, and accept that concept, then you will see that
whatever you want in the future already exists. If everything is
happening at the one time, then the parallel version of you with
what you want already exists!

How to Use the Secret

63

It takes no time for the Universe to manifest what you want. Any
time delay you experience is due to your delay in getting to the
place of believing, knowing, and feeling that you already have it. It
is you getting yourself on the frequency of what you want When
you are on that frequency, then what you want will appear.

BOB DOYLE
Size is nothing to the Universe. It is no more difficult to
attract, on a scientific level, something that we consider huge
to something that we consider infinitesimally small.
The Universe does everything with zero effort. The grass
doesn't strain to grow. It's effortless. It's just this great design.
It's all about what's going on in your mind. It's about what
we put in place, saying, ''This is big, it's going to take some
time." And, "This is small. I'll give it an hour." Those are
our rules that we define. There are no rules according to the
Universe. You provide the feelings of having it now; it will
respond—whatever it is.
There is no time for the Universe and there is no size for the Universe. It is as easy to manifest one dollar as it is to manifest one
million dollars. It is the same process, and the only reason why
one may come faster and the other may take longer is because you
thought that a million dollars was a lot of money and that one dollar was not very much.

64

The Secret

BOB DOYLE
Some people have an easier time with little things, and so we
sometimes say start with something small, like a cup of coffee.
Make it your intention to attract a cup of coffee today.

BOB PROCTOR
Hold an image of talking to an old friend that you haven't
seen for a long time. Somehow or another somebody's going to
start talking to you about that person. That person's going to
phone you or you'll get a letter from her.
Starting with something small is an easy way to experience the law
of attraction with your own eyes. Let me share a story with you of
a young man who did exactly that. He watched The Secret and he
decided to start with something small.
He created a picture of a feather in his mind / and he made sure this
feather was unique. He created particular markings on the feather
so he would know without any doubt that if he saw this feather,
it had come to him through his intentional use of the law of attraction.
Two days later, he was about to walk into a high-rise building on
a street in New York City. He said he did not know why, but he
just happened to look down. There at his feet, at the entrance to a
high-rise building in New York City, was the feather! Not just any
feather, but the exact feather he had imagined. It was identical to
the picture he had created in his mind, with all of its unique markings. In that moment he knew, without a shred of doubt, that this

How to Use the Secret

65

was the law of attraction working in all its glory. He realized his
amazing ability and power to attract something to himself through
the power of his mind. With total faith, he has now moved onto
creating much bigger things.

DAVID SCHIRMER
INVESTMENT TRAINER, TEACHER.
AND WEALTH SPECIALIST
People are amazed at how I line up parking
spaces. I've done this right from when I first
understood The Secret. I would visualize a parking space
exactly where I wanted it, and 95 percent of the time it would
be therefore me and I would just pull straight in. Five percent
of the time I'd have to wait just a minute or two, and the
person would pull out and I'd pull in, I do that all the time.
Now you might understand why a person who says, "I always get
parking spaces," gets them. Or why a person who says, "I am really lucky, I win things all the time," wins one thing after another,
all the time. These people expect it. Begin to expect great things, and
as you do, you will create your life in advance.

66

The Secret

You can use the law of attraction to create your whole life in advance, right down to the next thing you are doing today Prentice
Mulford, a teacher whose writings share so many insights into the
law of attraction and how to use it, demonstrates how important it
is to think your day in advance.
"When you say to yourself 'I am going to have
a pleasant visit or a pleasant journey/ you are
literally sending elements and forces ahead
of your body that will arrange things to make
your visit or journey pleasant. When before the
visit or the journey or the shopping trip you
are in a bad humor, or fearful or apprehensive
of something unpleasant, you are sending
unseen agencies ahead of you which will make
some kind of unpleasantness. Our thoughts,
or in other words, our state of mind, is ever
at work 'fixing up' things good or bad in
advance."

Prentice Mulford wrote those words in the 1870s. What a pioneer!
You can see clearly how important it is to think in advance every
event in every day. You will no doubt have experienced the oppo-

How to Use the Secret

67

site of thinking your day in advance, and one of the repercussions
of that is having to rush and hurry.
If you are rushing or hurrying, know that those thoughts and actions are based in fear (fear of being late) and you are "fixing up"
bad things ahead for you. As you continue to rush, you will attract
one bad thing after another into your path. In addition to that, the
law of attraction is "fixing up" more future circumstances that will
cause you to rush and hurry. You must stop and move yourself off
that frequency. Take a few moments and shift yourself, if you don't
want to summon bad things to you.
Many people, particularly in Western societies, chase "time" and
complain that they don't have enough time. Well, as someone says
that they don't have enough time, so it must be by the law of attraction. If you have been chasing your tail with thoughts of not
having enough time, from now on declare emphatically, "I have
more than enough time," and change your life.
You can also turn waiting into a powerful time to create your future life. Next time you are in a situation where you are waiting,
seize that time and imagine having all the things you want. You
can do this anywhere, anytime. Turn every life situation into a
positive one!
Make it a daily habit to determine every event in your life in advance,
through your thoughts. Set the Universal forces ahead of you in everything you do and everywhere you go, by thinking the way you want
it to go in advance. Then you are creating your life intentionally.

• Like Aladdin's Genie, the law of attraction grants our every
command.
• The Creative Process helps you create what you want in three simple steps: ask, believe, and receive.
• Asking the Universe for what you want is your opportunity to get
clear about what you want. As you get clear in your mind, you have
asked.
• Believing involves acting, speaking, and thinking as though you
have already received what you've asked for. When you emit the
frequency of having received it, the law of attraction moves people,
events, and circumstances for you to receive.
• Receiving involves feeling the way you will feel once your desire
has manifested. Feeling good now puts you on the frequency of what
you want.
• To lose weight, don't focus on "losing weight." Instead, focus on
your perfect weight. Feel the feelings of your perfect weight, and
you will summon it to you.
• It takes no time for the Universe to manifest what you want. It is as
easy to manifest one dollar as it is to manifest one million dollars.
68

• Starting with something small, like a cup of coffee or parking
spaces, is an easy way to experience the law of attraction in action.
Powerfully intend to attract something small As you experience the
power you have to attract, you will move on to creating much bigger things.
• Create your day in advance by thinking the way you want it to go,
and you will create your life intentionally.

DR. JOE VITALE
A lot of people feel stuck or imprisoned or confined by their
current circumstances. Whatever your circumstances right
now, that is only your current reality, and current reality will
begin to change as a result of beginning to use The Secret
Your current reality or your current life is a result of the thoughts
you have been thinking. All of that will totally change as you begin
to change your thoughts and your feelings.
"That a man can change himself... and master his
own destiny is the conclusion of every mind who
is wide-awake to the power of right thought."
(1866-1954)

71

72

The Secret

LISA NICHOLS
When you want to change your circumstances, you must
first change your thinking. Every time you look inside
your mail expecting to see a bill, guess what — it'll be
there. Each day you go out dreading the bill! You're never
expecting anything great. You're thinking debt, you're
expecting debt. So debt must show up so you won't think
you're crazy. And every day you confirm your thought: Is
debt going to be there? Yes, debt's there. Is debt going to
be there? Yes, debt's there. Is debt going to be there? Yes,
debt's there. Wiry? Because you expected debt to be there.
So it showed up, because the law of attraction is always
being obedient to your thoughts. Do yourself a favor—
expect a check!
Expectation is a powerful attractive force, because it draws things
to you. As Bob Proctor says, "Desire connects you with the thing
desired and expectation draws it into your life." Expect the things
you want and don't expect the things you don't want. What do
you expect now?
JAMES RAY

Most people look at their current state of affairs and they
say, "This is who I am." That's not who you are. That's
who you were. Let's say for instance that you don't
have enough money in your bank account, or you don't
have the relationship that you want, or your health and
fitness aren't up to par. That's not who you are; that's the
residual outcome of your past thoughts and actions. So

Powerful Processes

73

we're constantly living in this residual, if you will, of the
thoughts and actions we've taken in the past. When you
look at your current state of affairs and define yourself by
that, then you doom yourself to have nothing more than
the same in future.
'"All that we are is a result of what we have
thought."

I would like to share a process with you that came from the great
teacher Neville Goddard in a lecture he delivered in 1954, entitled
"The Pruning Shears of Revision." This process has had a profound effect on my life. Neville recommends at the end of every
day, before you go to sleep, to think through the events of the
day. If any events or moments did not go the way you wanted,
replay them in your mind in a way that thrills you. As you recreate those events in your mind exactly as you want, you are
cleaning up your frequency from the day and you are emitting a
new signal and frequency for tomorrow. You have intentionally
created new pictures for your future. It is never too late to change
the pictures.

74

The Secret

DR. JOE VITALE
What can you do right now to begin to turn your life
around? The very first thing is to start making a list of
things to be grateful for. This shifts your energy and starts to
shift your thinking. Whereas before this exercise you might
be focusing on what you don't have, your complaints, and
your problems, you go in a different direction when you do
this exercise. You start to be grateful for all the things that
you feel good about.

"If it is a new thought to you that gratitude
brings your whole mind into closer harmony
with the creative energies of the Universe,
consider it well, and you will see that it is true.'

MARCI SHIMOFF
Gratitude is absolutely the way to bring more into
your life.

Powerful Processes

75

DR- JOHN GRAY
PSYCHOLOGIST, AUTHOR, AND
INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER
Every man knows that when his wife is
appreciating him for the little things that he does, what
does he want to do? He wants to do more. It's always about
appreciation. It pulls things in. It attracts support.
DR. JOHN DEMARTINI
Whatever we think about and thank about we bring about.
JAMES RAY
Gratitude has been such a powerful exercise for me. Every
morning I get up and say "Thank you." Every morning,
when my feet hit the floor, "Thank you." And then I start
running through what I'm grateful for, as I'm brushing
my teeth and doing the things I do in the morning. And I'm
not just thinking about them and doing some rote routine.
I'm putting it out there and I'm feeling the feelings of
gratitude.
The day we filmed James Ray sharing his powerful exercise of
gratitude is one I will never forget. From that day on, I made
James's process my life. Every morning, I do not get out bed until
I have felt the feelings of gratitude for this brand new day and all I
am grateful for in my life. Then as I get out of bed, when one foot
touches the ground I say, "Thank," and "you" as my second foot
touches the ground. With each step I take on my way to the bath-

76

The Secret

room, I say "Thank you." I continue to say and feel "Thank you" as
I am showering and getting ready. By the time I am ready for the
day, I have said "Thank you" hundreds of times.
As I do this, I am powerfully creating my day and all that it will
contain. I am setting my frequency for the day and intentionally
declaring the way I want my day to go, rather than stumbling out
of bed and letting the day take control of me. There is no more
powerful way to begin your day than this. You are the creator of
your life, and so begin by intentionally creating your day!
Gratitude was a fundamental part of the teachings of all the great
avatars throughout history. In the book that changed my life, The
Science of Getting Rich, written by Wallace Wattles in 1910, gratitude
is its longest chapter. Every teacher featured in The Secret uses gratitude as part of his or her day. Most of them begin their day with
thoughts and feelings of gratitude.
Joe Sugarman, a wonderful man and successful entrepreneur,
watched the film The Secret and contacted me. He told me his favorite part was the gratitude process, and that his use of gratitude
had contributed to all he had achieved in his life. With all the success
Joe has attracted to himself, he continues to use gratitude every day,
even for the smallest things. When he gets a parking space he always
says and feels, "Thank you." Joe knows the power of gratitude and
all it has brought to him, and so gratitude is his way of life.
With all that I have read and with all that I have experienced in my
own life using The Secret, the power of gratitude stands above eve-

Powerful Processes

77

rything else. If you only do one thing with the knowledge of The
Secret use gratitude until it becomes your way of life.
DR. JOE VITALE
As soon as you start to feel different about what you already
have, you will start to attract more of the good things. More
of the things you can he grateful for. You could look around
and say, "Well, I don't have the car I want. I don't have the
house I want. I don't have the spouse I want. I don't have the
health I want" Whoah! Back up, back up! Those are all the
things you don't want. Focus on what you already have that
you're grateful for. And it might be that you have the eyes
to read this. It might be the clothes that you have. Yes, you
might prefer something else and you might get something
else pretty soon, if you start feeling grateful for what you
have.

"Many people who order their lives rightly in all
other ways are kept in poverty by their lack of
gratitude."

It is impossible to bring more into your life if you are feeling ungrateful about what you have. Why? Because the thoughts and
feelings you emit as you feel ungrateful are all negative emotions.
Whether it is jealousy, resentment, dissatisfaction, or feelings of
"not enough" those feelings cannot bring you what you want.

78

The Secret

They can only return to you more of what you do not want. Those
negative emotions are blocking your own good coming to you. If
you want a new car but you are not grateful for the car you have,
that will be the dominant frequency you are sending out.
Be grateful for what you have now. As you begin to think about all
the things in your life you are grateful for, you will be amazed at
the never-ending thoughts that come back to you of more things
to be grateful for. You have to make a start, and then the law of attraction will receive those grateful thoughts and give you more just
like them. You will have locked into the frequency of gratitude and
all good things will be yours.

"The daily practice of gratitude is one of the
conduits by which your wealth will come to

you."

LEE BROWER
WEALTH TRAINER A N D SPECIALIST,
AUTHOR. AN D TEACH ER

I think everybody goes through times when
they say, "Things aren 't working right," or,
"Things are going had." Once, when there were some
things going on in my family, I found a rock, and I just sat
holding it. I took this rock, I stuck it in my pocket, and I said,
"Every time I touch this rock I'm going to think of something

Powerful Processes

79

that I'm grateful for." So every morning when I get up in the
morning, I pick it up off the dresser, I put it in my pocket, and
I go through the things that I'm grateful for. At night, what
do I do? I empty my pocket, and there it is again.
I've had some amazing experiences with this idea. A guy from
South Africa saw me drop it. He asked, "What is that?" I
explained it to him, and he started calling it a gratitude rock.
Two weeks later I got an email from him, in South Africa.
And he said, "My son is dying from a rare disease. It's a
type of hepatitis. Would you send me three gratitude rocks?"
They were just ordinary rocks I found off the street, so I said,
"Sure." I had to make sure that the rocks were very special, so
I went out to the stream, picked out the right rocks, and sent
them off to him.
Four or five months later I get an email from him. He said,
"My son's better, he's doing terrific." And he said, "But you
need to know something. We've sold over a thousand rocks at
ten dollars apiece as gratitude rocks, and we've raised all this
money for charity. Thank you very much."
So it's very important to have an "attitude of gratitude."
The great scientist Albert Einstein revolutionized the way we view
time, space, and gravity. From his poor background and poor beginnings, you would have thought it impossible for him to achieve
all that he did. Einstein knew a great deal of The Secret, and he
said, "Thank you" hundreds of times each day. He thanked all

80

The Secret

the great scientists who had preceded him for their contributions,
which had enabled him to learn and achieve even more in his
work, and eventually become one of the greatest scientists who
has ever lived.
One of the most powerful uses of gratitude can be incorporated in
the Creative Process to turbo-charge what you want. As Bob Proctor advised in the first step of the Creative Process, Ask, start by
writing down what you want. "Begin each sentence with, I am so
happy and grateful now that..." (and you fill in the rest).
When you give thanks as though you have already received what
you want, you are emitting a powerful signal to the Universe. That
signal is saying that you have it already because you are feeling
gratitude for it now. Each morning before you get out of bed, make
it a habit to feel the feelings of gratitude in advance for the great day
ahead, as though it is done.
From the moment I discovered The Secret and formulated the vision to share this knowledge with the world, I gave thanks every
day for the film The Secret, which would bring joy to the world. I
had no idea how we would bring this knowledge to the screen, but
trusted that we would attract the way. I stayed focused and held
to the outcome. I felt deep feelings of gratitude in advance. As that
became my state of being, the floodgates opened and all the magic
flowed into our lives. For the magnificent team of The Secret, and
for me, our deep, heartfelt feelings of gratitude continue to this
day. We have become a team that resonates gratitude with every
moment, and it has become our way of life.

Powerful Processes

81

Visualization is a process that has been taught by all the great
teachers and avatars throughout the centuries, as well as by all the
great teachers living today. In Charles Haanel's book, The Master
Key System, written in 1912, he gives twenty-four weekly exercises
to master visualization. (More important, his complete Master Key
System will also help you become the master of your thoughts.)
The reason visualization is so powerful is because as you create
pictures in your mind of seeing yourself with what it is you want,
you are generating thoughts and feelings of having it now. Visualization is simply powerfully focused thought in pictures, and it
causes equally powerful feelings. When you are visualizing, you
are emitting that powerful frequency out into the Universe. The
law of attraction will take hold of that powerful signal and return
those pictures back to you, just as you saw them in your mind.
DR. DENIS WAITLEY

I took the visualization process from the Apollo program,
and instituted it during the 1980s and '90s into the Olympic
program. It was called Visual Motor Rehearsal.
When you visualize then you materialize. Here's an
interesting thing about the mind: we took Olympic athletes

82

The Secret

and had them run their event only in their mind, and then
hooked them up to sophisticated biofeedback equipment.
Incredibly, the same muscles fired in the same sequence when
they were running the race in their mind as when they were
running it on the track. How could this be? Because the mind
can't distinguish whether you're really doing it or whether it's
just a practice. If you've been there in the mind you'll go there
in the body.
Think about the inventors and their inventions: The Wright
Brothers and the plane. George Eastman and film. Thomas
Edison and the light bulb. Alexander Graham Bell and the telephone. The only way anything has ever been invented or created is because one person saw a picture in his mind. He saw it
clearly, and by holding that picture of the end result in his mind,
all the forces of the Universe brought his invention into the
world, through him.
These men knew The Secret. These were men who had utter faith
in the invisible, and who knew the power within them to leverage
the Universe and bring the invention into the visible. Their faith
and their imagination have been the cause of the evolution of humankind, and we reap the benefits of their creative minds every
single day.
You may be thinking, "I do not have a mind like these great inventors." You may be thinking, "They could imagine those things,
but I can't." You could not be further from the truth, and as you
continue on this great discovery of the knowledge of The Secret,

Powerful Processes

83

you will learn that you not only have the mind they had, but
much more.
MIKE DOOLEY
When you 're visualizing, token you 've got that picture
playing out in your mind, always and only dwell upon the
end result.
Here's an example. Look at the back of your hands, right now.
Really look at the back of your hands: the color of your skin,
the freckles, the blood vessels, the rings, the fingernails. Take
in all those details. Right before you close your eyes, see those
hands, your fingers, wrapping around the steering wheel of
your brand new car.
DR. JOE VITALE
This is such a holographic experience—so real in this
moment—that you don't even feel as if you need the car,
because it feels like you have it already.
Dr. Vitale's words brilliantly sum up the place you want to get
yourself to when visualizing. When it feels like a jolt as you open
your eyes in the physical world, your visualization became real.
But that state, that plane, is the real. It is the field where everything
is created, and the physical is just the result of the real held of all
creation. That's why you won't feel as if you need it anymore, because you tuned in and felt the real field of creation through your
visualization. In that field, you have everything now. When you
feel that, you will know it.

84 The Secret
JACK CAN FIELD
It's the feeling that really creates the attraction, not just
the picture or the thought. A lot of people think, "If I think
positive thoughts, or if I visualize having what I want, that
will be enough." But if you're doing that and still not feeling
abundant, or feeling loving or joyful, then it doesn't create the
power of the attraction.
BOB DOYLE

You put yourself in the feeling place of really being in that
car. Not "I wish I could get that car," or, "Some day I'll have
that car," because that's a very definite feeling associated with
that. It's not in the now. It's in the future. If you stay in that
feeling, it will always be in the future.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
.

Now that feeling and that inner seeing will begin to be an
open doorway through which the power of the Universe will
begin to express.
"What this power is I cannot say. All know is
that it exists."

JACK CANFIELD
Our job is not to figure out the how. The how will show up
out of a commitment and belief in the what.

Powerful Processes

85

MIKE DOOLEY
The "hows" are the domain of the Universe. It always knows
the shortest, quickest, fastest, most harmonious way between
you and your dream.
DR. JOE VITALE
If you turn it over to the Universe, you will be surprised and
dazzled by what is delivered to you. This is where magic and
miracles happen.
The teachers of The Secret are all aware of the elements you bring
into play when you visualize. As you see the picture in your mind
and feel it, you are bringing yourself to a place of believing you
have it now. You are also implementing trust and faith in the Universe, because you are focusing on the end result and experiencing
the feeling of that, without giving any attention whatsoever to
"how" it will come about. Your picture in your mind is seeing it
as done. Your feelings are seeing it as done. Your mind and your
entire state of being are seeing it as already happened. That is the art
of visualization.
DR. JOE VITALE
You want to do this virtually daily, but it should never
be a chore. What's really important to the whole Secret is
feeling good. You want to feel exhilarated by this whole
process. You want to be high, happy, in tune, as much as
possible.

86

The Secret

Everyone has the power to visualize. Let me prove it to you with
a picture of a kitchen. For this to work, first of all you have to get
all thoughts of your kitchen out of your mind. Do not think of your
kitchen. Totally clear your mind of pictures of your kitchen, with
its cupboards, refrigerator, oven, tiles, and color scheme . . .
You saw a picture of your kitchen in your mind, didn't you? Well,
then you just visualized!
"Everyone visualizes whether he knows it or
not. Visualizing is the great secret of success."

Here's a tip about visualizing, which Dr. John Demartini shares in
his Breakthrough Experience seminars. John said that if you create
a static picture in your mind it can be difficult to hold that picture,
so create lots of movement in your picture.
To illustrate this, imagine your kitchen again, and this time imagine yourself entering that kitchen, walking to the refrigerator and
putting your hand on the door handle, opening the door, looking
inside, and finding a cold bottle of water. Reach in and grab it. You
can feel the coldness on your hand as you grasp the bottle. You
have the bottle of water in one hand, and you use your other hand
to close the refrigerator door. Now that you are visualizing your
kitchen with detail and movement it's easier to see and hold the
picture, isn't it?

Powerful Processes

87

"We all possess more power and greater
possibilities than we realize, and visualizing is
one of the greatest of these powers."

MARCI SHIMOFF
The only difference between people who live in this way, who
live in the magic of life, and those who don't is that the people
who live in the magic of life have habituated ways of being.
They've made a habit of using the law of attraction, and magic
happens with them wherever they go. Because they remember
to use it. They use it all the time, not just as a one-time event.
Here are two true stories that clearly demonstrate the powerful law
of attraction and the immaculate matrix of the Universe in action.
The first story is about a woman named Jeannie, who bought a
DVD of The Secret and was watching it at least once a day so that
she would absorb the message right into the cells of her body. She
was particularly impressed with Bob Proctor, and she thought it
would be wonderful to meet him.
One morning Jeannie collected her mail, and to her utter amazement the mailman had accidentally delivered Bob Proctor's mail

88

The Secret

to her address. What Jeannie didn't know is that Bob Proctor lived
just four blocks away from her! Not only that, but Jeannie's house
number was the same number as Bob's. She immediately took
the mail to deliver it to the correct address. Can you imagine her
utter delight when the door opened and Bob Proctor was standing
before her? Bob is rarely at home as he travels all over the world
teaching, but the matrix of the Universe knows only perfect timing.
From Jeannie's thought of how wonderful it would be to meet Bob
Proctor, the law of attraction moved people, circumstances, and
events throughout the Universe so that it happened.
The second story involves a ten-year-old boy named Colin, who
had seen and loved The Secret. Colin's family made a weeklong
visit to Disney World, and on their first day they experienced long
lines at the park. So that night, just before Colin fell asleep, he
thought, "Tomorrow I'd love to go on all the big rides and never
have to wait in line."
The next morning, Colin and his family were at the gates of
Epcot Center as the park opened, and a Disney staff member approached and asked them if they would be Epcot's First Family of
the Day. As First Family they would be given VIP status, a special
escort by a staff member, and walk-on passes for every big ride in
Epcot. It was everything and more that Colin had wished for!
Hundreds of families were waiting to enter Epcot that morning,
but Colin didn't have the slightest doubt as to why his family had
been chosen First Family. He knew it was because he had used The
Secret.

Powerful Processes

89

Imagine discovering—at the age of ten—that the power to move
worlds lies within you!

"Nothing can prevent your picture from coming
into concrete form except the same power which
gave it birth—yourself."

JAMES RAY
People hold that for a while; and they're really a champion
at it. They say, "I'm fired up. I saw this program and I'm
going to change my life." And yet results aren't showing.
Beneath the surface it's just about ready to break through, but
the person will look just at the surface results and say, "This
stuff doesn 't work." And you know what? The Universe says,
"Your wish is my command," and it disappears.
When you allow a thought of doubt to enter your mind, the law
of attraction will soon line up one doubtful thought after another.
The moment a thought of doubt comes, release it immediately.
Send that thought on its way. Replace it with "I know I am receiving
now." And feel it.
JOHN ASSARAF
Knowing the law of attraction, I wanted to really put it to
use and to see what would happen. In 1995 I started to create
something called a Vision Board, where I take something that

The Secret

I want to achieve, or something that I want to attract, like
a car or a watch or the soul mate of my dreams, and I put a
picture of what I want up on this board. Every day I would
sit in my office and I would look up at this board and I would
start to visualize. I would really get into the state of having
already acquired it.
I was getting ready to move. We put all the furniture, all the
boxes, into storage, and I made three different moves over a
period of five years. And then I ended up in California and
bought this house, renovated it for a year, and then had all
the stuff brought from my farmer home five years earlier. One
morning my son Keenan came into my office, and one of the
boxes that was sealed for five years was right at the doorstep.
He asked, "What's in the boxes, Daddy?" And I said, "Those
are my Vision Boards/' He then asked, "What's a Vision
Board?" I said, "Well, it's where I put alt my goals up. I cut
them out and I put all my goals up as something that I want
to achieve in my life." Of course at five and a half years old
he didn't understand, and so I said, "Sweetheart, let me just
show you, that'll be the easiest way to do it."
I cut the box open, and on one Vision Board was a picture
of a home that I was visualizing five years earlier. What was
shocking was that we were living in that house. Not a house
like it—I actually bought my dream home, renovated it, and
didn't even know it. I looked at that house and I started to
cry, because I was just blown away. Keenan asked, "Why are
you crying?" "I finally understand how the law of attraction

P o w e r f u l Processes

91

works. I finally understand the power of visualization. I
finally understand everything that I've read, everything that
I've worked with my whole life, the way I've built companies.
It worked for my home as well, and I bought our dream home
and didn 't even know it."

"Imagination is everything. It is the preview of
life's coming attractions."

You can let your imagination go wild with a Vision Board, and
place pictures of all the things you want, and pictures of how you
want your life to be. Make sure you put the Vision Board in a place
where you see it and look at it every day as John Assaraf did. Feel
the feelings of having those things now. As you receive, and feel
gratitude for receiving, you can remove pictures and add new
ones. This is a wonderful way to introduce children to the law of
attraction. I hope the creation of a Vision Board inspires parents
and teachers worldwide.
One of the people on The Secret website Forum put a picture of
The Secret DVD on his Vision Board. He had seen The Secret but
didn't own his own copy. Two days after he created his Vision
Board, I felt inspired to post a notice on The Secret Forum giving
away DVDs to the first ten people who posted. He was one of the
ten! He had received a copy of The Secret DVD within two days of
putting it on his Vision Board. Whether it is a DVD of The Secret or
a house, the joy of creating and receiving is magnificent!

92

The Secret

Another powerful example of visualizing comes from my mother's experience of buying a new house. Several people besides
my mother had put in offers for this particular house. My mother
decided to use The Secret to make that house hers. She sat down
and wrote her name and the new address of the house over and
over. She continued doing this until it felt as though it was her address. She then imagined placing all of her furniture in that new
house. Within hours of doing these things, she received a phone
call saying her offer had been accepted. She was so thrilled, but it
didn't come as a surprise to her because she knew that house was
hers. What a champion!
JACK CAN FIELD
Decide what you want. Believe you can have it. Believe you
deserve it and believe it's possible for you. And then close
your eyes every day for several minutes, and visualize having
what you already want, feeling the feelings of already having
it. Come out of that and focus on what you're grateful for
already, and really enjoy it. Then go into your day and release
it to the Universe and trust that the Universe will figure out
how to manifest it.

Expectation is a powerful attractive force. Expect the things you
want, and don't expect the things you don't want.
Gratitude is a powerful process for shifting your energy and bringing more of what you want into your life. Be grateful for what you
already have, and you will attract more good things.
Giving thanks for what you want in advance turbo-charges your
desires and sends a more powerful signal out into the Universe.
Visualization is the process of creating pictures in your mind of
yourself enjoying what you want. When you visualize, you generate powerful thoughts and feelings of having it now. The law of attraction then returns that reality to you, just as you saw it in your
mind.
To use the law of attraction to your advantage, make it a habitual
way of being, not just a one-time event.
At the end of every day, before you go to sleep, go back through the
events of the day. Any events or moments that were not what you
wanted, replay them in your mind the way you wanted them to go.

93

"Whatever the mind . . . can conceive it can
achieve."

JACK CANFIELD
The Secret was a real transformation for me, because I grew
up with a very negative father who thought that rich people
were people that had ripped everyone off and thought that
anyone that had money must have deceived somebody. So I
grew up with a lot of beliefs about money; that if you had it,
it made you bad, only evil people have money, and money
doesn't grow on trees. "Who do you think I am, Rockefeller?'
That was one of his favorite phrases. So I grew up truly
believing that life was difficult. It was only when I met W.
Clement Stone that I began to shift my life.
95

96

The Secret

When I was working with Stone he said, "I want you to set a
goal that's so big that if you achieved it, it would blow your
mind, and you would knew it's only because of what I've
taught you that you would have achieved this goal" At the
time I was making about eight thousand dollars a year, so I
said, "I want to make a hundred thousand dollars in a year."
Now, I had no idea how I could do that. I saw no strategy,
no possibility, but I just said, "I'm going to declare that, I'm
going to believe it, I'm going to act as if it's true, and release
it" So I did that.
One of the things he taught me was every day to close your
eyes and visualize the goals as if it's already achieved. I had
actually made a hundred-thousand-dollar bill that I'd put on
the ceiling. So first thing in the morning I'd look up and there
it was, and it would remind me that this was my intention.
Then I would close my eyes and visualize having this hundredthousand-dollar-a-year lifestyle. Interestingly enough, nothing
major happened for about thirty days. I didn't have any great
breakthrough ideas, no one was offering me more money.
About four weeks into it, I had a hundred-thousand-dollar
idea. It just came right into my head. I had a book I had
written, and I said, "If I can sell four hundred thousand
copies of my book at a quarter each, that'd be a hundred
thousand dollars." Now, the book was there, but I never had
this thought. (One of The Secrets is that when you have an
inspired thought, you have to trust it and act on it.) I didn't
know how I was going to sell four hundred thousand copies.

The Secret to Money

Then I saw the National Enquirer at the supermarket. I had
seen that millions of times and it was just background. And
all of a sudden it jumped out at me as foreground. I thought,
"If readers knew about my book, certainly four hundred
thousand people would go out and buy it."
About six weeks later I gave a talk at Hunter College in
New York to six hundred teachers, and afterward a woman
approached me and said, "That was a great talk. I want to
interview you. Let me give you my card." As it turns out, she
was a freelance writer who sold her stories to the National
Enquirer. The theme from "The Twilight Zone" went off in
my head, like, whoah, this stuff's really working. That article
came out and our book sales started to take off.
The point I want to make is that I was attracting into my life
all these different events, including this person. To make a
long story short, I did not make a hundred thousand dollars
that year. We made ninety-two thousand three hundred and
twenty-seven dollars. But do you think we were depressed and
saying, "This doesn't work"? No, we were saying, "This is
amazing!" So my wife said to me, "If it works for a hundred
thousand, do you think it'd work for a million ?" And I said,
"I don't know, I think so. Let's try it."
My publisher wrote me a royalty check for our first Chicken
Soup for the Soul book. And he actually put a smiley face in
his signature, because it was the first million-dollar check he'd
ever written.

98

The Secret

So I know from my own experience, became I wanted to test it
Does this Secret really work? We put it to the test. It absolutely
worked, and now I live my life from that every single day.
The knowledge of The Secret and the intentional use of the law of
attraction can be applied to every single subject in your life. It is the
same process for everything you want to create, and the subject of
money is no different.
To attract money, you must focus on wealth. It is impossible to
bring more money into your life when you are noticing you do not
have enough, because that means you are thinking thoughts that
you do not have enough. Focus on not enough money, and you will
create untold more circumstances of not having enough money.
You must focus on the abundance of money to bring that to you.
You have to emit a new signal with your thoughts, and those
thoughts should be that you currently have more than enough. You
really do need to call your imagination into play and make believe
you already have the money you want. And it is so much fun to do!
You will notice as you pretend and play games of having wealth
that you feel instantly better about money, and as you feel better
about it, it will begin to flow into your life.
Jack's wonderful story inspired The Secret Team to create a blank
check available as a free download on The Secret website, www
.thesecret.tv. The blank check is for you, and it is from the Bank of
the Universe. You fill in your name, the amount, and details, and
place it in a prominent place where you will see it every day. When

The Secret to Money

99

you look at the check, feel the feelings of having that money now.
Imagine spending that money, all the things you will buy and the
things you will do. Feel how wonderful that is! Know it is yours,
because when you ask, it is. We have received hundreds of stories
from people who have brought huge sums of money to them using
The Secret check. It's a fun game that works!

The only reason any person does not have enough money is because they are blocking money from coming to them with their
thoughts. Every negative thought, feeling, or emotion is blocking
your good from coming to you, and that includes money. It is not
that the money is being kept from you by the Universe, because all
the money you require exists right now in the invisible. If you do
not have enough, it is because you are stopping the flow of money
coming to you, and you are doing that with your thoughts. You
must tip the balance of your thoughts from lack-of-money to morethan-enough-money. Think more thoughts of abundance than of
lack, and you have tipped the balance.
When you need money, it is a powerful feeling within you, and so
of course through the law of attraction you will continue to attract
needing money.
I can speak from experience about money, because just before I
discovered The Secret my accountants told me that my company

100 The Secret

had suffered a major loss that year, and in three months it would
be history. After ten years of hard work, my company was about to
slip through my fingers. And as I needed more money to save my
company, things just got worse. There seemed no way out.
Then I discovered The Secret, and everything in my life—including the state of my company—was totally transformed, because I
changed the way I was thinking. As my accountants continued to
fuss about the figures and focus on that, I kept my mind focused on
abundance and all being well. I knew with every fiber of my being
that the Universe would provide, and it did. It provided in ways I
could not have imagined. I had my moments of doubt, but when
the doubt came I immediately moved my thoughts to the outcome
of what I wanted. I gave thanks for it, I felt the joy of it, and I believed.

I want to let you in on a secret to The Secret. The shortcut to anything you want in your life is to BE and FEEL happy now! It is the
fastest way to bring money and anything else you want into your
life. Focus on radiating out into the Universe those feelings of joy
and happiness. When you do that, you will attract back to you all
things that bring you joy and happiness, which will not only include an abundance of money, but everything else you are wanting. You must radiate out the signal to bring back what you want.
As you radiate out those feelings of happiness, they will be sent
back to you as the pictures and experiences of your life. The law of
attraction is reflecting back your innermost thoughts and feelings
as your life.

The Secret to Money

101

DR. JOE VITALE
/ can imagine what a lot of people are thinking: "How can I
attract more money into my life? How can I get more of the
green stuff? How can I get more of wealth and prosperity?
How can I, when I love my job, deal with the credit card debt
that I have, and the realization that maybe there's a ceiling on
the money that can come in, cause it's coming to me through
my job? How can I bring in more?" Intend it!
This goes back to one of the things we've been talking about
throughout the whole Secret. Your job is to declare what
you would like to have from the catalogue of the Universe. If
cash is one of them, say how much you would like to have. "I
would like to have twenty-five thousand dollars, unexpected
income, within the next thirty days," or whatever it happens
to be. It should be believable for you.
If you have held thoughts in the past that the only way money can
come to you is through your job, then let that go immediately. Can
you appreciate that as you continue to think that, it must be your
experience? Such thoughts do not serve you.
You are now coming to understand that there is abundance for
you, and it is not your job to work out "how" the money will come
to you. It is your job to ask, to believe you are receiving, and feel

102

The Secret

happy now. Leave the details to the Universe on how it will bring
it about.
BOB PROCTOR
Most people have a goal of getting out of debt. That will keep
you in debt forever. Whatever you're thinking about, you will
attract. You say, "But it's get out of debt." I don't care if it's
get out or get in, if you're thinking debt, you're attracting
debt. Set up an automatic debt repayment program and then
start to focus on prosperity.
When you have a pile of bills that you have no idea how you are
going to pay you cannot focus on those bills, because you will continue to attract more bills. You have to find a way that works for
you to focus on prosperity despite the bills around you. You have to
find a way of feeling good, so you can bring your good to you.
JAMES RAY

So many times people say to me, "I'd like to double my
income in the next year." But then you look at their
actions and they're not doing the things that are going to
make that happen. They'll turn right around and they'll
say, "I can't afford that." Guess what? "Your wish is my
command."
If the words "I can't afford it" have passed your lips/ your power
to change that is now. Change it with, "I can afford that! I can buy
that!" Say it over and over. Become like a parrot. For the next

The Secret to Money 103

thirty days, make it your intention that you are going to look at
everything you like and say to yourself, "I can afford that. I can
buy that." As you see your dream car drive past, say, "I can afford that." As you see clothes you love, as you think about a great
vacation, say, "I can afford that." As you do this you will begin to
shift yourself and you will begin to feel better about money. You
will begin to convince yourself that you can afford those things,
and as you do, the pictures of your life will change.
LISA NICHOLS
When you focus on lack and scarcity and what you don't
have, you fuss about it with your family, you discuss it with
your friends, you tell your children that you don't have
enough —"'We don't have enough for that, we can't afford
that"—then you'll never be able to afford it, because you
begin to attract more of what you don't have. If you want
abundance, if you want prosperity, then focus on abundance.
Focus on prosperity.

"The spiritual substance from which comes all
visible wealth is never depleted. It is right with
you all the time and responds to your faith in it
and your demands on it."

Now that you know The Secret, when you see someone who is
wealthy you will know that that person's predominant thoughts

104

The Secret

are on wealth and not on scarcity, and that they have drawn wealth
to them—whether they did it consciously or unconsciously. They
focused on thoughts of wealth and the Universe moved people,
circumstances, and events to deliver wealth to them.
The wealth that they have, you have also. The only difference between you and them is that they thought the thoughts to bring the
wealth to them. Your wealth is waiting for you in the invisible, and
to bring it into the visible, think wealth!
DAVID SCHIRMER

When I first understood The Secret, every day I would get
a bunch of bills in the mail I thought, "How do I turn this
around?" The law of attraction states that what you focus
on you will get, so I got a bank statement, I whited out the
total, and I put a new total in there. I put exactly how much
I wanted to see in the bank. So I thought, "What if I just
visualized checks coming in the mail?" So I just visualized a
bunch of checks coming in the mail Within just one month,
things started to change. It is amazing; today I just get
checks in the mail. I get a few bills, but I get more checks
than bills.
Since the film The Secret was released, we have received hundreds
and hundreds of letters from people who have said that since
watching the film they have received unexpected checks in the
mail. And it happened because as they gave their focus and attention to David's story, they brought checks to them.

The Secret to Money

105

A game I created that helped shift my feelings about my pile of
bills was to pretend that the bills were actually checks. I would
jump for joy as I opened them and say, "More money for me!
Thank you. Thank you." I took each bill, imagined it was a check,
and then I added a zero to it in my mind to make it even more. I
got a notepad and wrote at the top of the page "I have received,"
and then I would list all the amounts of the bills with an added
zero. Next to each amount I would write "Thank you," and feel
the feelings of gratitude for receiving it—to the point where I had
tears in my eyes. Then I would take each bill, which looked very
small compared to what I had received, and I would pay it with
gratitude!
I never opened my bills until I had got myself into the feeling
that they were checks, if I opened my bills before convincing
myself they were checks, my stomach would churn when I
opened them. I knew that the emotion of the churning in my
stomach was powerfully bringing more bills. I knew I had to
erase that feeling, and replace it with joyful feelings, so I could
bring more money into my life. In the face of a pile of bills, that
game worked for me, and it changed my life. There are so many
games you can create, and you will know what works best for
you by the way you feel inside. When you make-believe, the
results come fast!

106

The Secret

LORAL LANGEMEIER
FINANCIAL STRATEGIST, SPEAKER, A N D
PERSONAL A N D CORPORATE COACH

I grew up on, "You have to work hard for money."
So I replaced that with, "Money comes easily and
frequently." Now in the beginning it feels like a lie, right?
There is a part of your brain that will say, "Oh you liar, it's
hard." So you have to know it's this little tennis match that
will go on for a while.
If you have had thoughts of, "I have to work really hard and
struggle to have money," let them go immediately. By thinking
those thoughts you emitted that frequency, and they became the
pictures of your life experience. Take Loral Langemeier's advice,
and replace those thoughts with, "Money comes easily and frequently."
D A V I D SCHIRMER

When it comes to creating wealth, wealth is a mindset. It's all
about how you think.
LORAL LANGEMEIER

I'd say 80 percent of the coaching that I do with folks is
about their psychology and the way they think. I know
when people say, "Oh, you can do it, I can't." People
have the capability to change their inner relationship and
conversation with money.

The Secret to Money 107

"The good news is that the moment you
decide that what you know is more important
than what you have been taught to believe,
you will have shifted gears in your quest for
abundance. Success comes from within, not
from without."

You have got to feel good about money to attract more to you. Understandably when people do not have enough money they do not
feel good about money, because they don't have enough. But those
negative feelings about money are stopping more money coming
to you! You have got to stop the cycle, and you stop it by starting to
feel good about money, and being grateful for what you have. Start
to say and feet, "I have more than enough." "There is an abundance
of money and it's on its way to me." "I am a money magnet." "I
love money and money loves me." "I am receiving money every
day." "Thank you. Thank you. Thank you/'

Giving is a powerful action to bring more money into your life,
because when you are giving you are saying, "I have plenty." It
will not be surprising to you to learn that the wealthiest people on
the planet are the greatest philanthropists. They give away vast

108 The Secret

amounts of money, and as they give, by the law of attraction, the
Universe opens up and floods vast amounts of money back to them
—multiplied!
If you are thinking, "I don't have enough money to give," bingo!
Now you know why you don't have enough money! When you
think you don't have enough to give, start giving. As you demonstrate faith in giving, the law of attraction must give you more to
give.
There is a big difference between giving and sacrificing. Giving
from a heart that is overflowing feels so good. Sacrificing does not
feel good. Don't confuse the two—they are diametrically opposed.
One emits a signal of lack and the other emits a signal of morethan-enough. One feels good and one does not feel good. Sacrifice
will eventually lead to resentment. Giving from a full heart is one
of the most joyous things you can do, and the law of attraction will
grab hold of that signal and flood even more into your life. You can
feet the difference.

I find so many people who make a tremendous amount of
money, but their relationships stink. And that's not wealth.
You can go after the money and you might get rich, but it
doesn't guarantee you'll be wealthy. I'm not suggesting that
money isn't a part of wealth, it absolutely is. But it's only a
part.

The Secret to Money 109

And then I meet a lot of people who are "spiritual" but
they're sick and broke all the time. That's not wealth either.
Life is meant to be abundant—in all areas.
If you have been brought up to believe that being wealthy is not
spiritual, then I highly recommend you read The Millionaires of
the Bible Series by Catherine Ponder. In these glorious books you
will discover that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and Jesus
were not only prosperity teachers, but also millionaires themselves, with more affluent lifestyles than many present-day millionaires could conceive of.
You are the heir to the kingdom. Prosperity is your birthright, and
you hold the key to more abundance—in every area of your life—
than you can possibly imagine. You deserve every good thing you
want, and the Universe will give you every good thing you want,
but you have to summon it into your life. Now you know The
Secret. You have the key. The key is your thoughts and feelings,
and you have been holding the key in your hand all of your life.

MARCI SHIMOFF
Many people in Western culture are striving for success. They
want the great home, they want their businesses to work,
they want all these outer things. But what we found in our
research is that having these outer things does not necessarily
guarantee what we really want, which is happiness. So we
go for these outer things thinking they're going to bring us

110 The Secret

happiness, but it's backward. You need to go for the inner joy,
the inner peace, the inner vision first, and then all of the outer
things appear.
Everything you want is an inside job! The outside world is the
world of effects; if s just the result of thoughts. Set your thoughts
and frequency on happiness. Radiate the feelings of happiness and
joy within you, and transmit that into the Universe with all of your
might, and you will experience true heaven on earth.

• To attract money, focus on wealth. It is impossible to bring more
money into your life when you focus on the lack of it.
• It is helpful to use your imagination and make-believe you already
have the money you want. Play games of having wealth and you
will feel better about money; as you feel better about it, more will
flow into your life.
• Feeling happy now is the fastest way to bring money into your life.
• Make it your intention to look at everything you like and say to
yourself, "I can afford that. I can buy that." You will shift your
thinking and begin to feel better about money.
• Give money in order to bring more of it into your life. When you are
generous with money and feel good about sharing it, you are saying,
"I have plenty."
• Visualize checks in the mail.
• Tip the balance of your thoughts to wealth. Think wealth.

MARIE D I A M O N D
FENG SHUI CONSULTANT, TEACHER,
AND SPEAKER
The Secret means that we are creators of our
Universe, and that every wish that we want to create
will manifest in our lives. Therefore, our wishes, thoughts,
and feelings are very important because they will manifest.
One day I went into the home of an art director, a very famous
film producer. In every corner he had this beautiful image of a
naked woman draped with a fabric, kind of turning away as if
she were saying, "I don't see you." I said to him, "I think you
might have trouble in your romance." And he said, "Are you
clairvoyant?" "No, but look. In seven places, you have exactly
that same woman." He said, "But I love that kind of painting.
I painted it myself." I said, "That's even worse because you
put all your creation and creativity in it."

114

The Secret

He's a gorgeous-looking man with all these actresses around
him because that's the work he does, and he doesn't have any
romance. I asked him, "What do you want?" "I want to date
three women a week." I said, "OK, paint it. Paint yourself with
three women, and hang it in every corner of your living space."
Six months later I saw him and asked, "How is your love
life?" "Great! Women call me, they want to date me."
"Because that's your wish," I said. He said, "I feel great. I
mean, for years I did not have a date and now I have three
dates a week. They're fighting over me." "Good for you,"
I said. Then he told me, "I really want to stabilize. I want
marriage now, I want romance." I said, "Well, then paint it."
He painted a beautiful romantic relationship, and a year later
he got married, and he's very happy.
This is because he put another wish out. He wished it in
himself for years without it happening because his wish could
not manifest. The outer level of himself—his house—was
contradicting his wish all the time. So if you understand this
knowledge, you just start playing with it.
Marie Diamond's story of her client is a perfect demonstration of
how Feng Shui reflects the teachings of The Secret. It illustrates how
our thoughts create powerfully when we put them into action. Any
action we take must be preceded by a thought. Thoughts create the
words we speak, the feelings we feel, and our actions. Actions are
particularly powerful because they are thoughts that have caused
us to act.

The Secret to Relationships 115

We may not even realize what our innermost thoughts are, but we
can see what we have been thinking by looking at the actions we
have taken. In the story of the film producer, his innermost thoughts
were reflected in his actions and surroundings. He had painted
many women, all turning away from him. Can you see what his
innermost thoughts were? Even though his words were saying he
wanted to date more women, his innermost thoughts did not reflect
that in his paintings. By deliberately choosing to change his actions,
it caused him to focus his entire thought on what he wanted. With
such a simple shift, he was able to paint his life and call it into existence through the law of attraction.
When you want to attract something into your life, make sure your
actions don't contradict your desires. One of the most wonderful
examples of this is given by Mike Dooley, one of the teachers featured in The Secret, in his audio course, Leveraging the Universe and
Engaging the Magic. It is a story of a woman who wanted to attract
her perfect partner into her life. She had done all the right things:
She got clear about what she wanted him to be like, made a detailed
list of all of his qualities, and visualized him in her life. Despite
doing all these things, there was no sign of him.
Then one day as she arrived home and was parking her car in the
middle of her garage, she gasped as she realized that her actions
were contradicting what she wanted. If her car was in the middle
of the garage, there was no room for her perfect partner's car! Her
actions were powerfully saying to the Universe that she did not
believe she was going to receive what she had asked for. So she
immediately cleaned up her garage and parked her car to one side,

116 The Secret

leaving space for her perfect partner's car on the other side. She
then went into her bedroom and opened her wardrobe, which was
jammed full of clothes. There was no room for her perfect partner's
clothes. So she moved some of her clothes to make space. She had
also been sleeping in the middle of her bed, and so she began sleeping on "her" side, leaving space for her partner.
This woman related her story to Mike Dooley over a dinner, and sitting next to her at the table was her perfect partner. After taking all
of these powerful actions and acting as if she had already received
her perfect partner, he arrived in her life and they are now happily
married.
Another simple example of "acting as if" is a story of my sister
Glenda, who is the production manager of the film The Secret. She
was living and working in Australia, and she wanted to move to
the United States and work with me in our U.S. office. Glenda knew
The Secret very well, and so she was doing all the right things to
bring forth what she wanted, but months were passing by and she
was still in Australia.
Glenda looked at her actions and realized she was not "acting as
if" she was receiving what she had asked for. So she began to take
powerful actions. She organized everything in her life for her departure. She canceled memberships, gave away things she would
not need, and she got her suitcases out and packed them. Within
four weeks, Glenda was in the United States working out of our
U.S. office.

The Secret to Relationships

117

Think about what you have asked for, and make sure that your
actions are mirroring what you expect to receive, and that they're
not contradicting what you've asked for. Act as if you are receiving it. Do exactly what you would do if you were receiving it
today, and take actions in your life to reflect that powerful expectation. Make room to receive your desires, and as you do, you are
sending out that powerful signal of expectation.

LISA NICHOLS

Inside relationships it's important to first understand who's
coming into the relationship, and not just your partner. You
need to understand yourself first.

JAMES RAY
How can you ever expect anyone else to enjoy your company
if you don't enjoy your own company? And so again, the law
of attraction or The Secret is about bringing that into your
life. You 've got to get really, really clear. Here's the question I
would ask you to consider: Do you treat yourself the way you
want other people to treat you ?
When you do not treat yourself the way you want others to treat
you, you can never change the way things are. Your actions are
your powerful thoughts, so if you do not treat yourself with

118 The Secret

love and respect, you are emitting a signal that is saying you are
not important enough, worthy enough, or deserving. That signal will continue to be broadcast, and you will experience more
situations of people not treating you well. The people are just
the effect. Your thoughts are the cause. You must begin to treat
yourself with love and respect, and emit that signal and get on
that frequency. Then the law of attraction will move the entire
Universe, and your life will be full of people who love and respect you.
Many people have sacrificed themselves for others, thinking when
they sacrifice themselves they are being a good person. Wrong! To
sacrifice yourself can only come from thoughts of absolute lack,
because it is saying, "There is not enough for everyone, so I will go
without" Those feelings do not feel good and will eventually lead
to resentment. There is abundance for everybody and it is each
person's responsibility to summon their own desires. You cannot
summon for another person because you cannot think and feel for
another. Your job is You, When you make feeling good a priority,
that magnificent frequency will radiate and touch everyone close
to you.
DR. JOHN GRAY
You become the solution for you. Don't point to another
person and say, "Now you owe me and you need to give me
more." Instead, give more to yourself. Take time off to give to
yourself, and in a sense to fill yourself up to fullness, to where
now you can overflow in giving.

The Secret to Relationships 119

"To acquire l o v e . . . fill yourself up with it until
you become a magnet."

Many of us were taught to put ourselves last, and as a consequence
we attracted feelings of being unworthy and undeserving. As those
feelings lodged within us, we continued to attract more life situations that had us feel more unworthy and not enough. You must
change that thinking.
"Undoubtedly to some, the idea of giving so
much love to self will seem very cold, hard and
unmerciful. Still this matter may be seen in a
different light, when we find that 'looking out for
Number One,' as directed by the Infinite, is really
looking out for Number Two and is indeed the
only way to permanently benefit Number Two."

Unless you fill yourself up first, you have nothing to give anybody.
Therefore it is imperative that you tend to You first. Attend to your
joy first. People are responsible for their own joy. When you tend
to your joy and do what makes you feel good, you are a joy to be
around and you are a shining example to every child and every
person in your life. When you are feeling joy you don't even have
to think about giving. It is a natural overflow.

120 The Secret

LISA NICHOLS
I got into many relationships expecting my partner to show
me my beauty, because I didn't see my own beauty. When I
was growing up, my heroes or my "she-roes" were the Bionic
Woman, Wonder Woman, and Charlie's Angels. And while
they're wonderful, they didn't look like me. It wasn't until I
fell in love with Lisa—I fell in love with my mocha skin, my
full lips, my round hips, my curly black hair—it wasn't until
that happened that the rest of the world was able to fall in love
with me as well.
The reason you have to love You is because it is impossible to feel
good if you don't love You. When you feel bad about yourself, you
are blocking all the love and all the good that the Universe has for
you.
When you feel bad about yourself it feels as though you are sucking the life out of you, because all of your good, on every single
subject—including health, wealth, and love—is on the frequency of
joy and feeling good. The feeling of having unlimited energy, and
that amazing feeling of health and wellness, are all on the frequency
of feeling good. When you don't feel good about You, you are on
a frequency that is attracting more people, situations, and circumstances that will continue to make you feel bad about You.
You must change your focus and begin to think about all the things
that are wonderful about You. Look for the positives in You. As you
focus on those things, the law of attraction will show you more
great things about You. You attract what you think about. All you

The Secret to Relationships 121

have to do is begin with one prolonged thought of something good
about You, and the law of attraction will respond by giving You
more like thoughts. Look for the good things about You. Seek and
ye shall find!
BOB PROCTOR
There's something so magnificent about you. I have been
studying me for forty-four years. I wanna kiss myself
sometimes! Because you're going to get to love yourself. I'm
not talking about conceit I'm talking about a healthy respect
for yourself And as you love yourself, you'll automatically
love others.
MARCI SHIMOFF
In relationships we're so used to complaining about other
people. For instance, "My coworkers are so lazy, my husband
makes me so mad, my children are so difficult." It's always
focusing on the other person. But for relationships to really
work, we need to focus on what we appreciate about the other
person, not what we're complaining about. When we're
complaining about those things we're only getting more of
those things.
Even if you're having a really hard time in a relationshipthings aren't working, you're not getting along, someone's in
your face—you still can turn that relationship around. Take a
piece of paper, and for the next thirty days sit down and write
all the things that you appreciate about that person. Think
about all the reasons that you love them. You appreciate their

122

The Secret

sense of humor, you appreciate how supportive they are. And
what you'll find is that when you focus on appreciating and
acknowledging their strengths, that's what you'll get more of,
and the problems will fade away.

LISA NICHOLS
Oftentimes you give others the opportunity to create your
happiness, and many times they fail to create it the way you
want it. Why? Because only one person can be in charge of
your joy, of your bliss, and that's you. So even your parent,
your child, your spouse—they do not have the control to
create your happiness. They simply have the opportunity to
share in your happiness. Your joy lies within you.
All your joy is on the frequency of love—the highest and the most
powerful frequency of all. You can't hold love in your hand. You
can only feel it in your heart. It is a state of being. You can see evidence of love being expressed through people, but love is a feeling,
and you are the only one that can radiate and emit that feeling of
love. Your ability to generate feelings of love is unlimited, and when
you love you are in complete and utter harmony with the Universe.
Love everything you can. Love everyone you can. Focus only on
things you love, feel love, and you will experience that love and joy
coming back to you—multiplied! The law of attraction must send
you back more things to love. As you radiate love, it will appear
as though the entire Universe is doing everything for you, moving
every joyful thing to you, and moving every good person to you.
In truth, it is.

• When you want to attract a relationship, make sure your thoughts,
words, actions, and surroundings don't contradict your desires.
• Your job is you. Unless you fill yourself up first, you have nothing to
give anybody.
• Treat yourself with love and respect, and you will attract people who
show you love and respect.
• When you feel bad about yourself, you block the love and instead you
attract more people and situations that will continue to make you
feel bad about you.
• Focus on the qualities you love about yourself and the law of attration will show you more great things about you.
• To make a relationship work, focus on what you appreciate about
the other person, and not your complaints. When you focus on the
strengths, you will get more of them.

123

DR, JOHN HAGELIN
QUANTUM PHYSICISTAND
PUBLIC POLICY EXPERT
Our body is really the product of our thoughts. We're
beginning to understand in medical science the degree
to which the nature of thoughts and emotions actually
determines the physical substance and structure and function
of our bodies.
DR JOHN DEMARTINI
We've known in the healing arts of a placebo effect. A placebo
is something that supposedly has no impact and no effect on
the body, like a sugar pill.
You tell the patient that this is just as effective, and what
happens is the placebo sometimes has the same effect, if not
greater effect, than the medication that is supposed to be

126 The Secret

designed for that effect. They have found out that the human
mind is the biggest factor in the healing arts, sometimes more
so than the medication.
As you are becoming aware of the magnitude of The Secret, you
will begin to see more clearly the underlying truth of certain occurrences in humankind, including in the area of health. The placebo
effect is a powerful phenomenon. When patients think and truly
believe the tablet is a cure, they will receive what they believe, and
they will be cured.
DR. JOHN DEMARTINI
If somebody is in a situation where they're sick and they have
an alternative to try to explore what is in their mind creating
it, versus using medicine, if it's an acute situation that could
really bring death to them, then obviously the medicine is a
wise thing to do, while they explore what the mind is about.
So you don't want to negate medicine. Every form of healing
has a place.
Healing through the mind can work harmoniously with medicine. If
pain is involved, then medicine can help to eliminate that pain, which
then allows the person to be able to focus with great force on health.
"Thinking perfect health" is something anybody can do privately
within themselves, no matter what is happening around them.
LISA NICHOLS

The Universe is a masterpiece of abundance. When you
open yourself to feel the abundance of the Universe, you'll

The Secret to Health

127

experience the wonder, joy, bliss, and all the great things that
the Universe has for you —good health, good wealth, good
nature. But when you shut yourself off with negative thoughts,
you'll feel the discomfort, you'll feel the aches, you'll feel the
pain, and you'll feel as if every day is painful to get through.

DR. BEN JOHNSON
PHYSICIAN, AUTHOR, AND
LEADER IN ENERGY HEALING

We've got a thousand different diagnoses and diseases
out there. They're just the weak link. They're all the result of
one thing: stress. If you put enough stress on the chain and
you put enough stress on the system, then one of the links
breaks.
All stress begins with one negative thought. One thought that went
unchecked, and then more thoughts came and more, until stress
manifested. The effect is stress, but the cause was negative thinking, and it all began with one little negative thought. No matter
what you might have manifested, you can change i t . . . with one
small positive thought and then another.
DR. JOHN DEMARTINI
Our physiology creates disease to give us feedback, to let us
know we have an imbalanced perspective, or we're not being
loving and grateful. So the body's signs and symptoms are not
something terrible.

128

The Secret

Dr. Demartini is telling us that love and gratitude will dissolve all
negativity in our lives, no matter what form it has taken. Love and
gratitude can part seas, move mountains, and create miracles. And
love and gratitude can dissolve any disease.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
The question frequently asked is, "When a person has
manifested a disease in the body temple or some kind of
discomfort in their life, can it be turned around through the
power of 'right' thinking?" And the answer is absolutely,
yes.

CATHY GOODMAN, A PERSONAL STORY

I was diagnosed with breast cancer. I truly believed
in my heart, with my strong faith, that I was already
healed. Each day I would say, "Thank you for my
healing." On and on and on I went, "Thank you for
my healing." I believed in my heart I was healed. I saw
myself as if cancer was never in my body.
One of the things I did to heal myself was to watch very funny
movies. That's all we would do was just laugh, laugh, and
laugh. We couldn't afford to put any stress in my life, because
we knew stress was one of the worst things you can do while
you're trying to heal yourself.

The Secret to Health 129

From the time I was diagnosed to the time I was healed
was approximately three months. And that's without any
radiation or chemotherapy.
This beautiful and inspiring story from Cathy Goodman demonstrates three magnificent powers in operation: The power of
gratitude to heal, the power of faith to receive, and the power of
laughter and joy to dissolve disease in our bodies.
Cathy was inspired to include laughter as part of her healing, after
hearing about the story of Norman Cousins.
Norman had been diagnosed with an "incurable" disease. The
doctors told him he had just a few months to live. Norman decided
to heal himself. For three months all he did was watch funny
movies and laugh, laugh, laugh. The disease left his body in those
three months, and the doctors proclaimed his recovery a miracle.
As he laughed, Norman released all negativity, and he released the
disease. Laughter really is the best medicine.
DR. BEN JOHNSON
We all come with a built-in basic program. It's called "selfhealing. " You get a wound, it grows back together. You get a
bacterial infection, the immune system comes and takes care of
those bacteria, and heals it up. The immune system is made to
heal itself

130

The Secret

BOB P R O C T O R

Disease cannot live in a body that's in a healthy emotional
state. Your body is casting off millions of cells every second,
and it's also creating millions of new cells at the same time.
DR. JOHN HAGELIN
In fact, parts of our body are literally replaced every day.
Other parts take a few months, other parts a couple of years.
But within a few years we each have a brand new physical
body.
If our entire bodies are replaced within a few years, as science has
proven, then how can it be that degeneration or illness remains in
our bodies for years? It can only be held there by thought, by observation of the illness, and by the attention given to the illness.

Think thoughts of perfection. Illness cannot exist in a body that
has harmonious thoughts. Know there is only perfection, and as
you observe perfection you must summon that to you. Imperfect
thoughts are the cause of all humanity's ills, including disease,
poverty, and unhappiness. When we think negative thoughts we
are cutting ourselves off from our rightful heritage. Declare and
intend, "I think perfect thoughts. I see only perfection. I am perfection."

The Secret to Health

131

I banished every bit of stiffness and lack of agility right out of my
body. I focused on seeing my body as flexible and as perfect as a
child's, and every stiff and aching joint vanished. I literally did this
overnight.
You can see that beliefs about aging are all in our minds. Science
explains that we have a brand new body in a very short time.
Aging is limited thinking, so release those thoughts from your
consciousness and know that your body is only months old, no
matter how many birthdays you have chalked up in your mind.
For your next birthday, do yourself a favor and celebrate it as your
first birthday! Don't cover your cake with sixty candles, unless you
want to summon aging to you. Unfortunately, Western society has
become fixated on age, and in reality there is no such thing.
You can think your way to the perfect state of health, the perfect
body, the perfect weight, and eternal youth. You can bring it into
being, through your consistent thinking of perfection.
BOB PROCTOR
If you have a disease, and you're focusing on it, and you're
talking to people about it, you're going to create more diseased
cells. See yourself living in a perfectly healthy body. Let the
doctor look after the disease.
One of the things that people often do when they have an illness is
talk about it all the time. That's because they're thinking about it all
the time, so they're just verbalizing their thoughts. If you are feel-

132 The Secret

ing a little unwell, don't talk about it—unless you want more of it.
Know that your thought was responsible and repeat as often as you
can, "I feel wonderful. I feel so good," and really feel it. If you are
not feeling great and somebody asks you how you are feeling, just
be grateful that that person has reminded you to think thoughts of
feeling well. Speak only the words of what you want.
You cannot "catch" anything unless you think you can, and thinking you can is inviting it to you with your thought. You are also
inviting illness if you are listening to people talking about their
illness. As you listen you are giving all of your thought and focus
to illness, and when you give all of your thought to something,
you are asking for it. And you are certainly not helping them. You
are adding energy to their illness. If you really want to help that
person, change the conversation to good things, if you can, or be
on your way. As you walk away, give your powerful thoughts and
feelings to seeing that person well, and then let it go.
LISA NICHOLS
Let's say you have two -people, both stricken with something,
but one chooses to focus on joy. One chooses to live in
possibility and hopefulness, focusing on all the reasons why
she should be joyful and grateful Then you have the second
person. Same diagnosis, but the second chooses to focus on the
disease, the pain, and the "woe is me."
BOB DOYLE

When people are completely focused on what's wrong and
their symptoms, they will perpetuate it. The healing will not

The Secret to Health 133

occur until they shift their attention from being sick to being
well. Because that's the law of attraction.
"Let us remember, so far as we can, that every
unpleasant thought is a bad thing literally put
in the body."

DR, JOHN HAGELIN
Happier thoughts lead to essentially a happier biochemistry.
A happier, healthier body. Negative thoughts and stress have
been shown to seriously degrade the body and the functioning
of the brain, because it's our thoughts and emotions that are
continuously reassembling, reorganizing, re-creating our
body.
No matter what you have manifested in regards to your body, you
can change it—inside and out. Start thinking happy thoughts and
start being happy. Happiness is a feeling state of being. You have
your finger on the "feeling happy" button. Press it now and keep
your finger pressed down on it firmly, no matter what is happening
around you.
DR. BEN JOHNSON

Remove physiological stress from the body, and the body docs
what it was designed to do. It heals itself.

134 The Secret

You don't have to fight to get rid of a disease. Just the simple process of letting go of negative thoughts will allow your natural state
of health to emerge within you. And your body will heal itself.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
I've seen kidneys regenerated. I've seen cancer dissolved. I've
seen eyesight improve and come back.
I had been wearing reading glasses for about three years before I
discovered The Secret. One night as I was tracing the knowledge of
The Secret back through the centuries, I found myself reaching for
my glasses to see what I was reading. And I stopped in my tracks.
The realization of what I had done struck me like a lightning bolt.

I had listened to society's message that eyesight diminishes with
age. I had watched people stretch their arms out so that they could
read something. I had given my thought to eyesight diminishing
with age, and I had brought it to me. I hadn't done it deliberately
but I had done it. I knew that what I had brought into being with
thoughts I could change, so I immediately imagined myself seeing
as clearly as when I was twenty-one years old. I saw myself in dark
restaurants, on planes, and at my computer, reading clearly and
effortlessly And I said over and over, "I can see clearly, I can see
clearly." I felt the feelings of gratitude and excitement for having
clear vision. In three days my eyesight had been restored, and I
now do not own reading glasses. I can see clearly.
When I told Dr. Ben Johnson, one of the teachers from The Secret,
about what I had done, he said to me, "Do you realize what had

The Secret to Health 135

to happen to your eyes for you to do that in three days?" I replied,
"No, and thank goodness I didn't know, so that thought was not
in my head! I just knew I could do it, and that I could do it fast."
(Sometimes less information is better!)
Dr. Johnson eliminated an "incurable" disease from his own body,
so the restoration of my eyesight seemed like nothing to me, compared with his own miracle story. In fact, I expected my eyesight
to come back overnight, so three days was no miracle in my mind.
Remember, time and size do not exist in the Universe. It is as easy
to heal a pimple as a disease. The process is identical; the difference
is in our minds. So if you have attracted some affliction to you,
reduce it in your mind to the size of a pimple, let go of all negative
thoughts, and then focus on the perfection of health.

DR. JOHN DEMARTINI
I always say that incurable means "curable from within."
I believe and know that nothing is incurable. At some point in time,
every so-called incurable disease has been cured. In my mind, and
in the world I create, "incurable" does not exist. There is plenty of
room for you in this world, so come join me and all who are here.
It is the world where "miracles" are everyday occurrences. It is a
world overflowing with total abundance, where all good things
exist now, within you. Sounds like heaven, doesn't it? It is.

136

The Secret

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH

You can change your life and you can heal yourself.

MORRIS GOODMAN
AUTHORAND INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER

My story begins on March 10,1981. This day
really changed my whole life. It was a day I'll
never forget. I crashed an airplane. I ended up
in the hospital completely paralyzed. My spinal cord
was crushed, I broke the first and second cervical vertebrae,
my swallowing reflex was destroyed, I couldn't eat or drink,
my diaphragm was destroyed, I couldn't breathe. All I could
do was blink my eyes. The doctors, of course, said I'd be a
vegetable the rest of my life. All I'd be able to do is blink my
eyes. That's the picture they saw of me, but it didn't matter
what they thought. The main thing was what I thought. I
pictured myself being a normal person again, walking out of
that hospital.
The only thing I had to work with in the hospital was my
mind, and once you have your mind, you can put things back
together again.
I was hooked to a respirator and they said I'd never breathe
on my own again because my diaphragm was destroyed.
But a little voice kept saying to me, "Breathe deeply, breathe
deeply." And finally I was weaned from it. They were at a
loss for an explanation. I could not afford to allow anything

The Secret to Health 137

to come into my mind that would distract me from my goal or
from my vision.
I had set a goal to walk out of the hospital on Christmas.
And I did. I walked out of the hospital on my own twofeet.
They said it couldn't be done. That's a day I will never
forget
For people who are sitting out there right now and are hurting, if I
wanted to sum up my life and sum up for people what they can do in
life, I would sum it up in six words: "Man becomes what he thinks
about."

Morris Goodman is known as The Miracle Man. His story was
chosen for The Secret because it demonstrates the unfathomable
power and unlimited potential of the human mind. Morris knew
the power within him to bring about what he chose to think
about. Everything is possible. Morris Goodman's story has inspired thousands of people to think, imagine, and feel their way
back to health. He turned the greatest challenge of his life into the
greatest gift.
Since the film The Secret was released, we have been inundated
with miracle stories of all types of diseases dissolving from people's bodies after they watched The Secret. All things are possible
when you believe.
On the subject of health I would like to leave you with these illuminating words from Dr. Ben Johnson: "We are now entering the

138 The Secret

era of energy medicine. Everything in the Universe has a frequency
and all you have to do to is change a frequency or create an opposite frequency. That's how easy it is to change anything in the
world, whether that's disease or emotional issues or whatever that
is. This is huge. This is the biggest thing that we have ever come
across."

The placebo effect is an example of the law of attraction in action.
When a patient truly believes the tablet is a cure, he receives what
he believes and is cured.
"Focusing on perfect health " is something we can all do within ourselves, despite what may be happening on the outside.
Laughter attracts joy, releases negativity, and leads to miraculous
cures.
Disease is held in the body by thought, by observation of the illness,
and by the attention given to the illness. If you are feeling a little
unwell, don't talk about it —unless you want more of it. If you listen to people talk about their illness, you add energy to their illness.
Instead, change the conversation to good things, and give powerful
thoughts to seeing those people in health.
Beliefs about aging are all in our minds, so release those thoughts
from your consciousness. Focus on health and eternal youth.
Do not listen to society's messages about diseases and aging. Negative messages do not serve you.

139

LISA NICHOLS
People have a tendency to look at the things that they want
and say, "Yes, I like that, I want that." However, they look
at the things that they don't want and they give them just as
much energy, if not more, with the idea that they can stamp it
out, they can eliminate it, obliterate it. In our society, we've
become content with fighting against things. Fighting against
cancer, fighting against poverty, fighting against war, fighting
against drugs, fighting against terrorisim, fighting against
violence. We tend to fight everything we don't want, which
actually creates more of a fight.

HALE DWOSKIN
TEACHER AND AUTHOR OF THE SEDONA METHOD
Anything we focus on we do create. So if we're really
angry, for instance, at a war that's going on, or strife,
141

142 The Secret

or suffering, we're adding our energy to it. We're pushing
ourselves, and that only creates resistance.
"What you resist persists."

BOB DOYLE

The reason that what you resist persists is because if you're
resisting something, you're saying, "No, I don't want this thing,
because it makes me feel this way—the way I am feeling right
now." So you're putting out a really strong emotion of, "I really
don't like this feeling," and then it comes racing toward you.
Resistance to anything is like trying to change the outside pictures
after they have been transmitted. It's a futile pursuit. You have to
go within and emit a new signal with your thoughts and feelings to
create the new pictures.
As you resist what has appeared, you are adding more energy and
more power to those pictures you don't like, and you are bringing
more of them at a furious rate. The event or circumstances can only
get bigger, because that is the law of the Universe.

JACK CANFIELD
The anti-war movement creates more war. The anti-drug
movement has actually created more drugs. Because we're
focusing on what we don't want—drugs!

The Secret to the World

143

LISA NICHOLS
People believe that if we really want to eliminate something,
focus on that. How much sense does it make for us to give
the particular problem all of the energy, as opposed to
focusing on trust, love, living in abundance, education, or
peace?
JACK CAN FIELD
Mother Teresa was brilliant. She said, "I will never attend an
anti-war rally. If you have a peace rally, invite me." She knew.
She understood The Secret. Look what she manifested in the
world.
HALE DWOSKIN
So if you're anti-war, be pro-peace instead. If you're antihunger, be pro-people having more than enough to eat. If you
are anti-a-particular politician, be pro-his opponent. Often
elections are tipped in favor of the person that the people are
really against, because he's getting all the energy and all the
focus.

Everything in this world began with one thought. The bigger things
get bigger because more people give their thoughts to it after it has
appeared. Then those thoughts and emotions keep that very event
in our existence, and make it bigger. If we took our minds off it and
focused instead on love, it could not exist. It would evaporate and
disappear.

144

The Secret

"Remember, and this is one of the most difficult
as well as most wonderful statements to grasp.
Remember that no matter what the difficulty is,
no matter where it is, no matter who is affected,
you have no patient but yourself; you have
nothing to do but convince yourself of the truth
which you desire to see manifested."

JACKCANFIELD

It's OK to notice what you don't want, because it gives you
contrast to say, "This is what I do want." But the fact is,
the more you talk about what you don't want, or talk about
how bad it is, read about that all the time, and then say how
terrible it is—well, you're creating more of that
You cannot help the world by focusing on the negative things. As
you focus on the negative events of the world, you not only add to
them, but you bring more negative things into your own life at the
same time.
When the pictures have appeared of something you do not want,
it is your cue to change your thinking and emit a new signal. If it
is a world situation, you are not powerless. You have all the power.
Focus on everybody being in joy. Focus on abundance of food. Give
your powerful thoughts to what is wanted. You have the ability to
give so much to the world by emitting feelings of love and wellbeing, despite what is happening around you.

The Secret to the World 145

JAMES RAY
So many times people say to me, "Well, James, I have to be
informed," Maybe you have to be informed, but you don't
have to be inundated.
When I discovered The Secret I made a decision that I would not
watch the news or read newspapers anymore, because it did not
make me feel good. The news services and the newspapers are
not in any way to blame for broadcasting bad news. As a global
community, we are responsible for it. We buy more newspapers
when a huge drama is the headline. The news channels' ratings
skyrocket when there is a national or international disaster. So the
newspapers and news services give us more bad news because, as
a society, that's what we are saying we want. The media is effect,
and we are cause. It is just the law of attraction in action!
The news services and newspapers will change what they deliver
to us when we emit a new signal and focus on what we want.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH

Learn to become still, and to take your attention away from
what you don't want, and all the emotional charge around it,
and place the attention on what you wish to experience....
Energy flows where attention goes.
"Think truly, and thy thoughts shall the world's
famine feed."

146

The Secret

Are you beginning to see the phenomenal power you have in this
world, just through your existence? As you focus on the good
things you feel good, and you are bringing more good things to the
world. At the same time, you are bringing more good things into
your own life. When you feel good you uplift your life, and you
uplift the world!
The law is perfection in operation.
DR. JOHN DEMARTINI
I always say, when the voice and the vision on the inside
become more profound, clear, and loud than the opinions
on the outside, you've mastered your life!
LISA NICHOLS
It's not your job to change the world, or the people around
you. It's your job to go with the flow inside of the Universe,
and to celebrate it inside the world that exists.
You are the master of your life, and the Universe is answering
your every command. Don't become mesmerized by the pictures
that have appeared if they are not what you want. Take responsibility for them, make light of them if you can, and let them go.
Then think new thoughts of what you want, feel them, and be
grateful that it is done.

The Secret to the World 147

DR. JOE VITALE
One of the questions I get asked all the time is if everyone uses
The Secret, and they all treat the Universe like a catalogue,
aren't we going to run out of stuff? Won't everyone just make
a run for it and bust the hank?
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
What's beautiful about the teaching of The Secret is that
there's more than enough to go around for everyone.
There is a lie that acts like a virus within the mind of
humanity. And that lie is, "There's not enough good to go
around. There's lack and there's limitation and there's just
not enough." And that lie has people living in fear, greed,
stinginess. And those thoughts of fear, greed, stinginess,
and lack become their experience. So the world has taken a
nightmare pill.
The truth is that there's more than enough good to go around.
There's more than enough creative ideas. There's more than
enough power. There's more than enough love. There's more
than enough joy. All of this begins to come through a mind
that is aware of its own infinite nature.

148

The Secret

To think there is not enough is to look at the outside pictures and
think that everything comes from the outside. When you do that,
you will most surely see lack and limitation. You now know that
nothing comes into existence from the outside, and that everything
first comes from thinking and feeling it on the inside. Your mind is
the creative power of all things. So how can there be any lack? It's
impossible. Your ability to think is unlimited, and so the things you
can think into existence are unlimited. And so it is with everyone.
When you truly know this, you are thinking from a mind that is
aware of its own infinite nature.
JAMES RAY

Every great teacher who has ever walked the planet has told
you that life was meant to be abundant.
"The essence of this law is that you must think
abundance; see abundance, feel abundance,
believe abundance. Let no thought of limitation
enter your mind."

JOHN ASSARAF
And so just when we think that resources are dwindling, we
find new resources that can achieve the same things.
The true story of a Belize oil team is an inspiring example of the
power of the human mind to bring forth resources. The directors

The Secret to the World 149

of Belize Natural Energy Limited were trained by the eminent
Dr. Tony Quinn, who specializes in Humanistic Physiology training. With Dr. Quinn's mind power training, the directors were
confident that their mental picture of Belize being a successful oilproducing country would be achieved. They took a brave step
forward to drill for oil in Spanish Lookout, and in one short year
their dream and vision became a reality. Belize Natural Energy
Limited discovered oil of the highest quality, in abundant flows
where fifty other companies had failed to find any. Belize has become an oil-producing country because an extraordinary team of
people believed in the unlimited power of their mind.
Nothing is limited—not resources or anything else. It is only
limited in the human mind. When we open our minds to the unlimited creative power, we will call forth abundance and see and
experience a whole new world.
DR. JOHN DEMARTINI
Even though we say we have lack, it's because we don't open
up our vision and see all of what is around us.
DR, JOE VITALE
You know when people start to live from their heart and go for
what they want, they don't go for the same things. That's the
beauty of this. We don't all want BMWs. We don't oil want
the same person. We don't all want the same experiences. We
don't all want the same clothing. We don't all want... (fill in
the blank).

150 The Secret

You are here on this glorious planet, endowed with this wonderful power, to create your life! There are no limits to what you can
create for You, because your ability to think is unlimited! But you
cannot create other people's lives for them. You cannot think for
them, and if you try to force your opinions on others you will
only attract like forces to You. So let all others create the life they
want.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
There's enough for everyone. If you believe it, if you can see it,
if you act from it, it'll show up for you. That's the truth.
"If you have any lack, if you are prey to poverty
or disease, it is because you do not believe or
do not understand the power that is yours. It is
not a question of the Universal giving to you.
It offers everything to everyone—there is no
partiality."

The Universe offers all things to all people through the law of
attraction. You have the ability to choose what you want to experience. Do you want there to be enough for you and for everyone? Then choose that and know, "There is abundance of all
things." "There is an unlimited supply." "There is so much magnificence." Each of us has the ability to tap into that unlimited
invisible supply through our thoughts and feelings, and bring it

The Secret to the World 151

into our experience. So choose for You, because you're the only
one who can.
LISA NICHOLS

Everything that you want—all the joy, love, abundance,
prosperity, bliss— it's there, ready for you to grab ahold of
it. And you've got to get hungry for it. You've got to be
intentional. And when you become intentional and on fire
for what you want, the Universe will deliver every single
thing that you 've been wanting. Recognize the beautiful and
wonderful things around you, and bless and praise them. And
on the other side, the things that aren't currently working the
way you want them to work, don't spend your energy faulting
or complaining. Embrace everything that you want so you
can get more of it.
Lisa's wise words, to "praise and bless" the things around you,
are worth their weight in gold. Praise and bless everything in your
life! When you are praising or blessing you are on the highest frequency of love. In the Bible, the Hebrews used the act of blessing to
bring forth health, wealth, and happiness. They knew the power of
blessing. For many people the only time they have blessed someone was when they sneezed, and so they have not used one of
the greatest powers to their full advantage. The dictionary defines
blessing as "invoking divine favor and conferring well-being or
prosperity," so begin right now to invoke the power of blessing in
your life, and bless everything and everyone. Likewise with praising, for when you are praising someone or something you are giv-

152

The Secret

ing love, and as you emit that magnificent frequency, it will return
to you a hundred-fold.
Praising and blessing dissolves all negativity, so praise and bless
your enemies. If you curse your enemies, the curse will come back
to harm you. If you praise and bless them you will dissolve all negativity and discord, and the love of the praising and blessings will
return to you. As you praise and bless, you will feel yourself shift
into a new frequency with the feedback of good feelings.
DR. DENIS WAITLEY
Most of the leaders in the past missed the great part of The
Secret, which is to empower and share with others.
This is the best time to have ever been alive in history. It's the
first time we've ever had the power to gain knowledge at our
fingertips.
With this knowledge you are becoming aware—of the truth of the
world, and yourself. My greatest insights into The Secret on the
subject of the world came from the teachings of Robert Collier,
Prentice Mulford, Charles Haanel, and Michael Bernard Beckwith.
With that understanding came total freedom. I truly hope that
you can come to the place of that same freedom. If you can, then
through your existence and the power of your thoughts, you will
bring the greatest good to this world and to the future of all humankind.

• What you resist, you attract, because you are powerfully focused
on it with emotion. To change anything, go within and emit a new
signal with your thoughts and feelings.
• You cannot help the world by focusing on the negative things. As
you focus on the world's negative events, you not only add to them,
but you also bring more negative things into your own life.
• Instead of focusing on the world's problems, give your attention and
energy to trust, love, abundance, education, and peace.
• We will never run out of good things because there's more than
enough to go around for everyone. Life is meant to be abundant.
• You have the ability to tap into the unlimited supply through your
thoughts and feelings and bring it into your experience.
• Praise and bless everything in the world, and you will dissolve
negativity and discord and align yourself with the highest frequency—love.

153

DR. JOHN HAGELIN
When we look around us, even at our own bodies, what we see
is the tip of the iceberg.
BOB P R O C T O R

Think of this for a moment. Look at your hand. It looks solid,
but it's really not. If you put it under a proper microscope,
you'd see a mass of energy vibrating.
JOHN ASSARAF

Everything is made up of the exact same thing, whether it's
your hand, the ocean, or a star.
D R . BEN J O H N S O N

Even/thing is energy, and let me help you to understand that
just a little bit. There's the Universe, our galaxy, our planet,
155

156

The Secret

and then individuals, and then inside of this body are organ
systems, then cells, then molecules, and then atoms. And then
there is energy. So there are a lot of levels to think about, but
everything in the Universe is energy.
When I discovered The Secret I wanted to know what science and
physics understood in terms of this knowledge. What I found was
absolutely amazing. One of the most exciting things about living
in this time is that the discoveries of quantum physics and new
science are in total harmony with the teachings of The Secret, and
with what all the great teachers have known throughout history.
I never studied science or physics at school, and yet when I read
complex books on quantum physics I understood them perfectly
because I wanted to understand them. The study of quantum physics helped me to have a deeper understanding of The Secret, on an
energetic level. For many people, their belief is strengthened when
they see the perfect correlation between the knowledge of The Secret and the theories of new science.
Let me explain how you are the most powerful transmission tower
in the Universe. In simple terms, ail energy vibrates at a frequency.
Being energy, you also vibrate at a frequency, and what determines
your frequency at any time is whatever you are thinking and feeling. All the things you want are made of energy, and they are vibrating too. Everything is energy.
Here is the "wow" factor. When you think about what you want,
and you emit that frequency you cause the energy of what you

The Secret to You

157

want to vibrate at that frequency and you bring it to You! As you
focus on what you want, you are changing the vibration of the
atoms of that thing, and you are causing it to vibrate to You. The
reason you are the most powerful transmission tower in the Universe is because you have been given the power to focus your
energy through your thoughts and alter the vibrations of what you
are focused on, which then magnetically draws it to you.
When you think about and feel those good things that you want,
you have immediately tuned yourself to that frequency, which then
causes the energy of all those things to vibrate to you, and they appear in your life. The law of attraction says that like attracts like.
You are an energy magnet, so you electrically energize everything
to you and electrically energize yourself to everything you want.
Human beings manage their own magnetizing energy, because no
one outside of them can think or feel for them, and it is thoughts
and feelings that create our frequencies.
Almost one hundred years ago, without the benefit of all the scientific discoveries of the last hundred years, Charles Haanel knew
how the Universe operated.

"The Universal Mind is not only intelligence,
but it is substance, and this substance is the
attractive force which brings electrons together
by the law of attraction so they form atoms;
the atoms in turn are brought together by the
same law and form molecules; molecules take

158

The Secret

objective forms and so we find that the law is the
creative force behind every manifestation, not
only of atoms, but of worlds, of the Universe, of
everything of which the imagination can form
any conception."

BOB PROCTOR
I don't care what city you're living in, you've got enough
power in your body, potential power, to illuminate the whole
city for nearly a week.
"To become conscious of this power is to become
a 'live wire/ The Universe is the live wire. It
carries power sufficient to meet every situation
in the life of every individual. When the
individual mind touches the Universal Mind, it
receives all its power."

JAMES RAY
Most people define themselves by this finite body, but
you're not a finite body. Even under a microscope you're an
energy field. What we know about energy is this: You go to a
quantum physicist and you say, "What creates the world?"
And he or she will say, "Energy." Well, describe energy.

The Secret to You 159

"OK, it can never be created or destroyed, it always was,
always has been, everything that ever existed always exists,
it's moving into form, through form and out of form." You
go to a theologian and ask the question, "What created the
Universe?" And he or she will say, "God." OK, describe God.
"Always was and always has been, never can be created or
destroyed, all that ever was, always will be, always moving
into form, through form and out of form." You see, it's the
same description, just different terminology.
So if you think you're this "meat suit" running around,
think again. You're a spiritual being! You're an energy field,
operating in a larger energy field.
How does all of this make you a spiritual being? For me, the answer to that question is one of the most magnificent parts of the
teachings of The Secret. You are energy, and energy cannot be created or destroyed. Energy just changes form. And that means You!
The true essence of You, the pure energy of You, has always been
and always will be. You can never not be.
On a deep level, you know that. Can you imagine not being? Despite everything you have seen and experienced in your life, can
you imagine not being? You cannot imagine it, because it is impossible. You are eternal energy.

160

The Secret

DR. JOHN HAGELIN

Quantum mechanics confirms it. Quantum cosmology
confirms it. That the Universe essentially emerges from
thought and all of this matter around us is just precipitated
thought. Ultimately toe are the source of the Universe, and
when we understand that power directly by experience, we
can start to exercise our authority and begin to achieve more
and more. Create anything. Know anything from within the
field of our own consciousness, which ultimately is Universal
consciousness that runs the Universe.
So depending upon how we use that power, positively or
negatively, that's the kind of body in terms of health, that's
the kind of environment we create. So we are the creators, not
only of our own destiny, but ultimately we are the creators
of Universal destiny. We are the creators of the Universe. So
there's no limit, really, to human potential. It's the degree to
which we recognize those deep dynamics and exercise them,
the degree to which we harness our power. And that really
has to do again with the level at which we think.
Some of the greatest teachers and avatars described the Universe
in the same way as Dr. Hagelin, by saying that all that exists is the
One Universal Mind, and there is nowhere that the One Mind is
not. It exists in everything. The One Mind is all intelligence, all
wisdom, and all perfection, and it is everything and everywhere

The Secret to You 161

at the same time. If everything is the One Universal Mind, and the
whole of it exists everywhere, then it is all in You!
Let me help you understand what that means for you. It means
that every possibility already exists. All knowledge, all discoveries, and all inventions of the future, are in the Universal Mind
as possibilities, waiting for the human mind to draw them forth.
Every creation and invention in history has also been drawn from
the Universal Mind, whether the person consciously knew that
or not.
How do you draw from it? You do it through your awareness of
it, and by using your wonderful imagination. Look around you
for needs waiting to be filled. Imagine if we had a great invention
to do this, or imagine if we had a great invention to do that. Look
for the needs, and then imagine and think their fulfilment into
being. You don't have to work out the discovery or the invention.
The Supreme Mind holds that possibility. All you have to do is
hold your mind on the end result and imagine filling the need,
and you will call it into being. As you ask and feel and believe,
you will receive. There is an unlimited supply of ideas waiting
for you to tap into and bring forth. You hold everything in your
consciousness.

"Divine Mind is the one and only reality."

JOHN ASSARAF
We're all connected. We just don't see it. There isn't an
"out there" and an "in here." Everything in the Universe is
connected. It is just one energy field.
So whichever way you look at it, the result is still the same. We are
One. We are all connected, and we are all part of the One Energy
Field, or the One Supreme Mind, or the One Consciousness, or
the One Creative Source. Call it whatever you want, but we are all
One.
If you think about the law of attraction now, in terms of us all being
One, you will see its absolute perfection.
You will understand why your negative thoughts about someone else will return to harm only You. We are One! You cannot
be harmed unless you call harm into existence by emitting those
negative thoughts and feelings. You have been given free will to
choose, but when you think negative thoughts and have negative feelings, you are separating yourself from the One and All
Good. Think about every negative emotion there is and you will
discover that every one of them is based in fear. They come from
thoughts of separation and from seeing yourself as separate from
another.
Competition is an example of separation. First, when you have
thoughts of competition, it is coming from a lack mentality, as
you are saying there is a limited supply. You are saying there is

The Secret to You

163

not enough for everybody, so we have to compete and fight to get
things. When you compete you can never win, even if you think
you won. By the law of attraction, as you compete you will attract
many people and circumstances to compete against You in every
single aspect of your life, and in the end you will lose. We are all
One, and so when you compete, you compete against You. You
have to get competition out of your mind, and become a creative
mind. Focus only on your dreams, your visions, and take all competition out of the equation.
The Universe is the Universal supply and supplier of everything.
Everything comes from the Universe, and is delivered to you
through people, circumstances, and events, by the law of attraction.
Think of the law of attraction as the law of supply. It is the law that
enables you to draw from the infinite supply. When you emit the
perfect frequency of what you want, the perfect people, circumstances, and events will be attracted to you and delivered!
It is not people who are giving you the things you desire. If you
hold that false belief, you will experience lack, because you are
looking at the outside world and people as the supply. The true
supply is the invisible field, whether you call that the Universe, the
Supreme Mind, God, Infinite Intelligence, or whatever else. Whenever you receive anything, remember that you attracted it to you
by the law of attraction, and by being on the frequency and in harmony with the Universal Supply. The Universal Intelligence which
pervades everything moved people, circumstances, and events to
give that thing to you, because that is the law.

164

The Secret

LISA NICHOLS
We often get distracted with this thing called our body and
our physical being. That just holds your spirit. And your
spirit is so big it fills a room. You are eternal life. You are God
manifested in human form, made to perfection.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
Scripturally we could say that we are the image and the likeness
of God. We could say toe are another way that the Universe
is becoming conscious of itself We could say that we are the
infinite field of unfolding possibility. All of that would be true.
"Ninety-nine percent of who you are is invisible
and untouchable."

You are God in a physical body. You are Spirit in the flesh. You are
Eternal Life expressing itself as You. You are a cosmic being. You
are all power. You are all wisdom. You are all intelligence. You are
perfection. You are magnificence. You are the creator, and you are
creating the creation of You on this planet.
JAMES RAY

Every tradition has told you that you were created in the
image and likeness of the creative source. That means that
you have God potential and power to create your world,
and you are.

The Secret to You

Maybe you've created things to this point that are wonderful
and worthy of you, and maybe you haven't. The question
I'd ask you to consider is, "Are the results you have in your
life what you really want? And are they worthy of you?" If
they're not worthy of you, then wouldn't now be the right
time to change those? Because you have the power to do that.
"All power is from within and therefore
under our control."

JACKCANFIELD
A lot of people feel like they're victims in life, and they'll often
point to past events, perhaps growing up with an abusive
parent or in a dysfunctional family. Most psychologists
believe that about 85 percent of families are dysfunctional, so
all of a sudden you're not so unique.
My parents were alcoholics. My dad abused me. My
mother divorced him when I was six.... I mean, that's
almost everybody's story in some form or not. The real
question is, what are you going to do now? What do you
choose now? Because you can either keep focusing on that,

165

166

The Secret

or you can focus on what you want. And when people start
focusing on what they want, what they don't want falls
away, and what they want expands, and the other part
disappears.
"A person who sets his or her mind on the
dark side of life, who lives over and over
the misfortunes and disappointments of
the past, prays for similar misfortunes and
disappointments in the future. If you will
see nothing but ill luck in the future, you are
praying for such ill luck and will surely get it."

If you go back over your life and focus on the difficulties from the
past, you are just bringing more difficult circumstances to You now.
Let it all go, no matter what it is. Do it for you. If you hold a grudge
or blame someone for something in the past, you are only harming
You. You are the only one who can create the life you deserve. As
you deliberately focus on what you want, as you begin to radiate
good feelings, the law of attraction will respond. All you have to do
is make a start, and as you do, you will unleash the magic.
LISA NICHOLS
You are the designer of your destiny. You are the author. You
write the story. The pen is in your hand, and the outcome is
whatever you choose.

The Secret to You 167

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
The beautiful thing about the law of attraction is that you
can begin where you are, and you can begin to think "real
thinking," and you can begin to generate within yourself a
feeling tone of harmony and happiness. The law will begin to
respond to that.
DR. JOE VITALE
So now you start to have different beliefs, like, "There
is more than enough in the Universe." Or you have the
belief that, "I'm not getting older, I'm getting younger."
We can create it the way we want it, by using the law of
attraction.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
-

And you can break yourself free from your hereditary
patterns, cultural codes, social beliefs, and prove once and for
all that the power within you is greater than the power within
the world.
DR FRED ALAN WOLF
You may be thinking, "Well, that's very nice, but I can't do
that." Or, "She won't let me do that!" Or, "He'll never let me
do that." Or, "I haven't got enough money to do that." Or,
"I'm not strong enough to do that." Or, "I'm not rich enough
to do that." Or, "I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not."
Every single "I'm not" is a creation!

168

The Secret

It is a good idea to become aware when you say, "I'm not" and
to think about what you are creating as you say it. A powerful
insight shared by Dr. Wolf has been equally documented by all the
great teachers with the power of the words I am. When you say "I
am,' the words that follow are summoning creation with a mighty
force, because you are declaring it to be fact. You are stating it with
certainty. And so immediately after you say, "I am tired" or "I am
broke" or "I am sick" or "I am late" or "I am overweight" or "I am
old," the Genie says, "Your wish is my command."
Knowing this, wouldn't it be a good idea to begin to use the two
most powerful words, I AM, to your advantage? How about, "I
AM receiving every good thing. I AM happy I AM abundant. I AM
healthy. I AM love. I AM always on time. I AM eternal youth. I AM
filled with energy every single day."
In his book The Master Key System, Charles Haanel claims that there
is an affirmation that incorporates every single thing any human
being can want, and that this affirmation will bring about harmonious conditions to all things. He adds, "The reason for this is
because the affirmation is in strict accordance with the Truth, and
when Truth appears every form of error or discord must necessarily disappear."
The affirmation is this: "I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful, loving, harmonious, and happy."
If it sounds like work to drag what you want out of the invisible and into the visible, try this shortcut: see what you want as

The Secret to You

169

absolute fact. This will manifest what you want with the speed of
light The second you ask, it is fact in the Universal spiritual field,
and that field is all that exists. When you conceive something in
your mind, know it is a fact, and that there can be no question
about its manifestation.

"There is no limit to what this law can do for
you; dare to believe in your own ideal; think of
the ideal as an already accomplished fact."

When Henry Ford was bringing his vision of the motor vehicle into
our world, people around him ridiculed him and thought he had
gone mad to pursue such a "wild" vision. Henry Ford knew much
more than the people who ridiculed him. He knew The Secret and
he knew the law of the Universe.

"Whether you think you can or think you can't,
either way you are right."

Do you think you can? You can achieve and do anything you want
with this knowledge. In the past you may have underestimated
how brilliant you are. Well, now you know you are the Supreme
Mind and that you can draw anything you want from that One
Supreme Mind. Any invention, any inspiration, any answer, any-

170

The Secret

thing. You can do anything you want. You are a genius beyond
description, so start telling yourself that and become aware of who
you really are.
MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
-

Are there any limits to this? Absolutely not. We are unlimited
beings. We have no ceiling. The capabilities and the talents
and the gifts and the power that is within every single
individual that is on the planet, is unlimited.

All your power is in your awareness of that power, and through
holding that power in your consciousness.
Your mind can be like a runaway steam train if you let it. It can take
you off to thoughts of the past, and then take you off to thoughts
of the future by taking past bad events and projecting those into
your future. Those out-of-control thoughts are creating too. When
you are aware, you are in the present and you know what you are
thinking. You have gained control of your thoughts, and that is
where all your power is.
So how do you become more aware? One way is to stop and ask
yourself, "What am I thinking now? What am I feeling now?" The
moment you ask you are aware, because you have brought your
mind back to the present moment.

The Secret to You 171

Whenever you think of it, bring yourself back to the awareness of
now. Do it hundreds of times each day, because, remember, all of
your power is in your awareness of your power. Michael Bernard
Beckwith sums up the awareness of this power when he says, "Remember to remember!" Those words have become the theme song
of my life.
To help myself become more aware, so I would remember to remember, I asked the Universe to give me a gentle nudge to bring me back
to the present whenever my mind has taken over and is "having a
party" at my expense. That gentle nudge happens by me bumping
myself or dropping something, a loud noise, or a siren or an alarm
going off. All of these things are signals to me that my mind has
taken off, and to come back to the present. When I receive these
signals I stop immediately and ask myself, "What am I thinking?
What am I feeling? Am I aware?" And of course in the moment I do
that I am aware. The very moment you ask yourself if you aware,
you are there. You are aware.

"The real secret of power is consciousness of
power."

As you become aware of the power of The Secret, and begin to use
it, all of your questions will be answered. As you begin to have
a deeper understanding of the law of attraction you can start to
make asking questions a habit and as you do, you will receive the
answer to each one. You can begin by using this book for that very

172

The Secret

purpose. If you are seeking an answer or guidance on something
in your life, ask the question, believe you will receive, and then
open this book randomly. At the exact place where the pages fall
open will be the guidance and answer you are seeking.
The truth is that the Universe has been answering you all of your
life, but you cannot receive the answers unless you are aware. Be
aware of everything around you, because you are receiving the
answers to your questions in every moment of the day. The channels those answers can come through are unlimited. They could
be delivered in the form of a newspaper headline that attracts
your attention, or overhearing someone speaking, or a song on
the radio, or signage on a truck passing by, or receiving a sudden
inspiration. Remember to remember, and become aware!
I have found in my own life and in others' lives that we do not
think well of ourselves or love ourselves completely. To not love
ourselves can keep what we want from us. When we don't love
ourselves, we are literally pushing things away from us.
Everything we want, whatever it may be, is motivated by love. It
is to experience the feelings of love in having those things—youth,
money, the perfect person, job, body, or health. To attract the things
we love we must transmit love, and those things will appear immediately.
The catch is, to transmit the highest frequency of love, you must
love yourself, and that can be difficult for many. If you focus on the
outside and what you see now, you may trip yourself up, because

The Secret to You 173

what you see and feel about you now is the result of what you used
to think. If you don't love you, the person you see now is likely to
be full of faults that you have found in yourself.
To love yourself fully, you must focus on a new dimension of You.
You must focus on the presence inside of You. Take a moment and
sit still. Focus on feeling the life presence inside you. As you focus
on the presence within, it will begin to reveal itself to You. It is a
feeling of pure love and bliss, and it is perfection. That presence is
the perfection of You. That presence is the real You. As you focus on
that presence, as you feel, love, and praise that presence, you will
love yourself fully, quite possibly for the first time in your life.
Any time you look at yourself with critical eyes, switch your focus
immediately to the presence within, and its perfection will reveal
itself to You. As you do this, all imperfections that have manifested
in your life will dissolve, because imperfections cannot exist in the
light of this presence. Whether you want to regain perfect eyesight,
dissolve disease and restore well-being, turn poverty into abundance, reverse aging and degeneration, or eradicate any negativity, focus on and love the presence within you and perfection will
manifest.
"The absolute truth is that the ' I ' is perfect
and complete; the real ' I ' is spiritual and can
therefore never be less than perfect; it can never
have any lack, limitation, or disease."

• Everything is energy. You are an energy magnet, so you electrically
energize everything to you and electrically energize yourself to everything you want.
• You are a spiritual being. You are energy, and energy cannot be created or destroyed—it just changes form. Therefore, the pure essence
of you has always been and always will be.
• The Universe emerges from thought. We are the creators not only of
our own destiny but also of the Universe.
• An unlimited supply of ideas is available to you. All knowledge,
discoveries, and inventions are in the Universal Mind as possibilities, waiting for the human mind to draw them forth. You hold everything in your consciousness.
• We are all connected, and toe are all One.
• Let go of difficulties from your past, cultural codes, and social beliefs. You are the only one who can create the life you deserve.
• A shortcut to manifesting your desires is to see what you want as
absolute fact.
• Your power is in your thoughts, so stay aware. In other words,
"Remember to remember."
175

NEALE DONALD WALSCH
AUTHOR, INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER,
AND SPIRITUAL MESSENGER
There is no blackboard in the sky on which
God has written your purpose, your mission
in life. There's no blackboard in the sky that
says, "Neale Donald Walsch. Handsome guy who lived in
the first part of the twenty-first century, who .. ."And then
there's a blank. And all I have to do to really understand
what I'm doing here, why I'm here, is to find that blackboard
and find out what God really has in mind for me. But the
blackboard doesn't exist.
So your purpose is what you say it is. Your mission is the
mission you give yourself Your life will be what you create it
as, and no one will stand in judgment of it, now or ever.
\77

178

The Secret

You get to fill the blackboard of your life with whatever you want.
If you have filled it in with baggage from the past, wipe it clean.
Erase everything from the past that does not serve you, and be
grateful it brought you to this place now, and to a new beginning.
You have a clean slate, and you can start over—right here/ right
now. Find your joy and live it!

JACK CAN FIELD
It took a lot of years for me to get this point, because I grew
up very much with this idea that there was something I was
supposed to do, and if I wasn't doing it, God wouldn't be
happy with me.
When I really understood that my primary aim was to feel
and experience joy, then I began to do only those things which
brought me joy. I have a saying: "If it ain't fun, don't do it!"
NEALE DONALD VVALSCH

Joy, love, freedom, happiness, laughter. That's what it is. And
if you just experience joy sitting there and meditating for an
hour, by golly, do that. If you experience joy eating a salami
sandwich, then do that!
JACKCANFIELD
When I pet my cat I'm in a state of joy. When I walk in nature
I'm in a state of joy. So I want to constantly put myself in
that state, and when I do, then all I have to do is have the
intention of what I want, and what I want manifests.

The Secret to Life 179

Do the things that you love and that bring you joy. If you don't
know what brings you joy, ask the question, "What is my joy?"
And as you find it and commit yourself to it, to joy, the law of
attraction will pour an avalanche of joyful things, people, circumstances, events and opportunities into your life, all because you are
radiating joy.

DR. JOHN HAGELIN
So inner happiness actually is the fuel of success.
Be happy now. Feel good now. That's the only thing you have to do.
If that's the only thing you get from reading this book, then you
have received the greatest part of The Secret.
DR. JOHN GRAY
Anything that makes you feel good is always going to be
drawing in more.
You are reading this book right now. It's you that drew this
into your life, and it's your choice whether you want to take it
and utilize it, if it feels good. If it doesn't feel good, then let it
go. Find something that feels good, that resonates with your
heart.
The knowledge of The Secret is being given to you, and what you
do with it is entirely in your hands. Whatever you choose for You is
right. Whether you choose to use it, or whether you choose not to
use it, you get to choose. The freedom of choice is yours.

180 The Secret

"Follow your bliss and the universe will open
doors for you where there were only walls."

LISA NICHOLS
When you follow your bliss you live in a constant space of
joy. You open yourself to the abundance of the Universe.
You're excited to share your life with those you love, and your
excitement, your passion, your bliss become contagious.
DR. JOE VITALE
That's what I'm doing almost all the time—following my
excitement, my passion, my enthusiasm—and I'm doing it
throughout my day,
BOB PROCTOR
Enjoy life, because life is phenomenal! It's a magnificent trip!
MARIE DIAMOND
You will live in a different reality, a different life. And people
will look at you and say, "What do you do different from me?"
Well, the only thing that is different is that you work with
The Secret.
MORRIS GOODMAN
And then you can do and have and be things that people once
said that's impossible for you to do and have and be.

The Secret to Life 181

DR. FRED ALAN WOLF
We're really now moving into a new era. It's the era where the
last frontier is not space, as "Star Trek" would say, but it's
going to be Mind.

DR. JOHN HAGELIN
I see a future of unbounded potential, unbounded possibilities.
Remember we're using, at mast, 5 percent of the. potential of
the human mind. One hundred percent human potential is the
result of proper education. So imagine a world where people
are using their full mental and emotional potential. We could
go anywhere. We could do anything. Achieve anything.
This time on our glorious planet is the most exciting time in history. We are going to see and experience the impossible becoming
possible, in every field of human endeavor and on every subject.
As we let go of all thoughts of limitation, and know that we are
unlimited, we will experience the limitless magnificence of humankind, expressed through sport, health, art, technology, science, and
every single field of creation.

BOB PROCTOR
See yourself with the good that you desire. Every religious
book tells us that, every great book on philosophy, every great
leader, all the avatars who have ever lived. Go back and study

182

The Secret

the wise ones. Many of them have been presented to you in
this book. They all understood one thing. They understood
The Secret. Now you understand it. And the more you use it,
the more you'll understand it.
The Secret is within you. The more you use the power within you,
the more you will draw it to you. You will reach a point where you
won't need to practice anymore, because you will Be the power,
you will be the perfection, you will Be the wisdom, you will Be the
intelligence, you will Be the love, you will Be the joy.

LISA NICHOLS
You've come to this juncture in your life, merely because
something in you kept saying, "You deserve to be happy."
You were born to add something, to add value to this world.
To simply be something, bigger and better than you were
yesterday.
Every single thing you've been through, every single moment
that you've come through, were to all prepare you for this
moment right now. Imagine what you can do from this day
forward with what you now know. Now you get that you are
the creator of your destiny. So how much more do you get
to do? How much more do you get to be? How many more
people do you get to bless, simply by your mere existence?
What will you do with the moment? How will you seize the
moment? No one else can dance your dance, no one else can
sing your song, no one else can write your story. Who you
are, what you do, begins right now!

The Secret to Life

183

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
I believe that you're great, that there's something magnificent
about you. Regardless of what has happened to you in your
life. Regardless of how young or old you think you might be.
The moment you begin to "think properly," this something
that's within you, this power within you that's greater than
the world, it will begin to emerge. It will take over your life. It
will feed you. It will clothe you. It will guide you, protect you,
direct you, sustain your very existence. If you let it Now that
is what I know, for sure.
The earth turns on its orbit for You. The oceans ebb and flow for
You. The birds sing for You. The sun rises and it sets for You. The
stars come out for You. Every beautiful thing you see, every wondrous thing you experience, is all there, for You. Take a look around.
None of it can exist, without You. No matter who you thought you
were, now you know the Truth of Who You Really Are. You are the
master of the Universe. You are the heir to the kingdom. You are
the perfection of Life. And now you know The Secret.
May the joy be with you!
"The secret is the answer to all that has been, all
that is, and all that will ever be."

• You get to fill the blackboard of your life with whatever you want.
• The only thing you need to do is feel good now.
• The more you use the power within you, the more power you will
draw through you.
• The time to embrace your magnificence is now.
• We are in the midst of a glorious era. As we let go of limiting thoughts,
we will experience humanity's true magnificence, in every area of creation.
• Do what you love. If you don't know what brings you joy, ask, "What
is my joy?" As you commit to your joy, you will attract an avalanche
of joyful things because you are radiating joy.
• Now that you have learned the knowledge of The Secret, what you
do with it is up to you. Whatever you choose is right. The power is
all yours.

184

JOHN ASSARAF
A former street kid, John Assaraf is now an
international bestselling author, lecturer, and
business advisor, committed to helping entrepreneurs create greater wealth while living an
extraordinary life. John has dedicated the last
twenty-five years to researching the human brain, quantum physics, and business strategies, as they relate to achieving success in
business and life. By applying what he learned, John has built four
multi-million-dollar companies from scratch, and he now shares
his unique business-building and moneymaking ideas with entrepreneurs and small business owners worldwide. To learn more,
visit www.onecoach.com.

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH
In 1986 Dr. Beckwith, a nonaligned, transreligious progressive, founded the Agape
International Spiritual Center, whose membership numbers 10,000 locally and hundreds
of thousands of friends and affiliates world185

186

Biographies

wide. He serves on international panels with spiritual luminaries
such as His Holiness the Dalai Lama; Dr. A. T. Ariyaratne, founder
of Sarvodaya; and Arun Gandhi, grandson of Mohandas K. Gandhi. He is co-founder of the Association for Global New Thought,
whose annual conference brings together scientists, economists,
artists, and spiritual leaders at the cutting edge of guiding humanity to its highest potential.
Dr. Beckwith teaches meditation and scientific prayer, conducts
retreats, and speaks at conferences and seminars. He is the originator of the Life Visioning Process, and author of Inspirations of the
Heart, 40 Day Mind Fast Soul Feast, and A Manifesto of Peace. Please
go to www.Agapelive.com for more information.

GENEVIEVE BEHREND

(c. 1881-c. i960)
Genevieve Behrend studied with the great
Judge Thomas Troward, one of the early
teachers of spiritual metaphysics, and author
of Mental Science. Thomas Troward chose
Behrend as his only pupil, and she went on to teach, lecture, and
practice "mental science" in North America for thirty-five years, as
well as write her own popular books, Your Invisible Power and Attaining Your Heart's Desire.

Biographies

187

LEE BROWER
Lee Brower is the founder and CEO of Empowered Wealth, an international consulting firm that offers businesses, foundations,
families, and individuals systems and solutions for empowering their Core, Experience,
Contribution, and Financial Assets. He is also the founder of The
Quadrant Living Experience, LLC, a boutique firm that licenses
and trains an international network of Quadrant Living Advisors.
Lee is co-author of Wealth Enhancement and Preservation and author
of The Brower Quadrant. His two websites are www-empowered
wealth.com and www.quadrantliving.com.

JACKCANFIELD
Jack Canfield, author of The Success Principles™, is the co-creator of the phenomenal
number one New York Times bestselling Chicken
Soup for the Soul® series, which currently has
more than 100 million copies in print. He is
America's leading expert in creating success breakthroughs for
entrepreneurs, corporate leaders, managers, sales professionals,
employees, and educators, and has helped hundreds of thousands
of individuals achieve their dreams. For more information on Jack
Canfield, visit www.jackcanfield.com.

188

Biographies

ROBERT COLLIER (1885-1950)
Robert Collier was a prolific and hugely successful American writer. All of his books,
which include The Secret of the Ages and Riches
within Your Reach, were founded on Collier's
own extensive research into metaphysics and
on his personal belief that success, happiness, and abundance are
easily and rightfully attainable by everyone. The excerpts contained
in this book were taken from the seven-volume set The Secret of the
Ages, with the generous consent of Robert Collier Publications.

DR. JOHN F. DEMARTINI
D.C, B.SC
Once told he was learning disabled, John Demartini is now a doctor, philosopher, author,
and international speaker. For many years
he had a successful chiropractic clinic, and
was once named Chiropractor of the Year. Dr. Demartini is now a
consultant to health professionals, and speaks and writes on the
subjects of healing and philosophy. His personal transformation
methodologies have helped thousands of people find a greater
order and happiness in their lives. His website is www.drde
martini.com.

MARIE DIAMOND
Marie is an internationally known Feng Shui
master who has been practicing for more
than twenty years,, refining the knowledge
given to her at an early age. She has advised

Biographies

189

numerous Hollywood celebrities, major film directors and producers, music giants, and famous authors. She has helped many
well-known public figures create more success in all areas of their
lives. Marie created Diamond Feng Shui, Diamond Dowsing, and
Inner Diamond Feng Shui to bridge the law of attraction in an
individual's environment. Her website is www.mariediamond
.com.

MIKE DOOLEY
Mike is not a "career" teacher or speaker; instead, as a "life adventurer" he has successfully navigated both the corporate and entrepreneurial arenas. After living and working
around the world for Price Waterhouse, in
1989 he co-founded Totally Unique Thoughts (TUT) to retail and
wholesale its own line of inspirational gifts. From the ground up,
TUT grew into a regional chain of stores, was carried by every
major U.S. department store, and reached consumers around the
globe through distribution centers in Japan, Saudi Arabia, and
Switzerland, selling over one million Totally Unique T-shirts®.
In 2000 he transformed TUT into a web-based inspirational and
philosophical Adventurers Club, which now has over 60,000 members from more than 169 countries. He is the author of a number of
books, including three volumes of Notes from the Universe and the
internationally acclaimed audio program, Infinite Possibilities: The
Art of Living Your Dreams. You can learn more about Mike and TUT
at www.tut.com.

190

Biographies

BOB DOYLE
Bob Doyle is the creator and facilitator of the
Wealth Beyond Reason program, a powerful multi-media curriculum on the law of
attraction and its practical application. Bob
focuses on the science of the law of attraction
to help you more purposefully activate the law in your life, and
to attract wealth, success, awesome relationships, and anything
else you desire. For more information, visit www.wealthbeyondreason.com.
HALE DWOSKIN
Author of the New York Times bestseller The
Sedona Method, Hale Dwoskin dedicates himself to freeing people of limiting beliefs in
order to help them achieve whatever their
hearts desire. The Sedona Method is a unique
and powerful technique that shows you how to release limiting
and painful feelings, beliefs, and attitudes. Hale has taught these
principles to corporations and individuals worldwide for the past
thirty years. His website is www.sedona.com.
MORRIS G O O D M A N
Dubbed "The Miracle Man," Morris Goodman made headlines in 1981 when he recovered from horrific injuries after crashing his
airplane. He was told he would never walk,
speak, or function normally again, but today
Morris travels the world inspiring and uplifting thousands of peo-

Biographies

191

ple with his astounding story. Morris's wife, Cathy Goodman, is
also featured in The Secret, telling her own inspiring account of selfhealing. To learn more, visit www.themiracleman.org.

JOHN GRAY, PH.D.
John Gray is the author of Men Are from Mars,
Women Are from Venus, the number one bestselling relationship book of the last decade,
selling over thirty million copies. He has authored fourteen other bestsellers, and conducts
seminars for thousands of participants. His focus is to help men and
women understand, respect, and appreciate their differences, in
both personal and professional relationships. His new book is The
Mars and Venus Diet and Exercise Solution. To learn more, visit www
.marsvenus.com.

CHARLES HAANEL (1866-1949)
Charles Haanel was a successful American
businessman and the author of several books,
all of which contained Haanel's own ideas
and methods that he used to achieve greatness in his own life. His most famous work is
The Master Key System, which gives twenty-four weekly lessons to
greatness, and is as popular today as it was when it was first published in 1912.

192

Biographies

JOHN HAGELIN, PH.D.
Dr. John Hagelin is a world-renowned quantum physicist, educator, and public policy
expert His book, Manual for a Perfect Government, explains how to solve major societal and
environmental problems and create world
peace through policies in harmony with the laws of nature. John
Hagelin was awarded the prestigious Kilby Award, which recognizes scientists who have made major contributions to society. He
was also the Natural Law Party presidential candidate in 2000.
John is regarded by many as one of the greatest scientists on the
planet today. His website is www.hagelin.org.
BILL HARRIS
Bill Harris is a professional speaker, teacher,
and business owner. After studying ancient
and modern research about the nature of
the mind and transformational techniques,
Bill created Holosync, an audio technology that results in the benefits of deep meditation. His company,
Centerpointe Research Institute, has enabled thousands of people
worldwide to lead happier, stress-free lives. To find out more, visit
www.centerpointe.com.

DR. BEN JOHNSON
M.D., N.M.D., D.O.
Originally trained in Western medicine, Dr.
Johnson became interested in energy healing
after overcoming a life-threatening illness

Biographies

193

using unconventional methods. He is chiefly interested in The
Healing Codes, a form of healing discovered by Dr. Alex Lloyd.
Today Dr. Johnson and Alex Lloyd rim The Healing Codes Company, which distributes the teachings. Visit www.healingcodes.com
to learn more.

LORAL LANGEMELER
Loral Langemeier is the founder of Live
Out Loud, which provides financial education and support to help people reach their
monetary goals. She believes that mindset is
the key to building wealth, and has assisted
many people in becoming millionaires. Loral speaks to individuals and corporations, passing on her knowledge and expertise.
Her website is www.liveoutloud.com.

PRENTICE MULFORD (1834-1891)
Prentice Muiford was one of the earliest
writers and founders of the New Thought
movement, and was a recluse for much of
his life. He has influenced countless writers
and teachers with his work, which deals with
mental and spiritual laws. Titles include Thoughts Arc Things and
The White Cross Library, a collection of his many essays.

194

Biographies

LISA NlCHOLS
Lisa Nichols is a powerful advocate of personal empowerment. She is the founder and
CEO of Motivating the Masses and Motivating the Teen Spirit, two comprehensive skills
programs that work to bring about profound
change in the lives of teenagers, women, and entrepreneurs, as well
as provide services to the educational system, corporate clients,
empowerment organizations, and faith-based programs. Lisa is the
co-author of Chicken Soup for the African American Sow/, from the bestselling worldwide series. Her website is www.Iisa-nichols.com.

BOB PROCTOR
Bob Proctor's wisdom came to him through
a lineage of great teachers. It began with Andrew Carnegie who passed it to Napoleon
Hill, and then Hill passed it to Earl Nightingale. Earl Nightingale then passed the torch of
wisdom to Bob Proctor. Bob has worked in the area of mind potential for over forty years. He travels the globe teaching The Secret,
helping companies and individuals to create lives of prosperity
and abundance through the law of attraction. He is the author of
the international bestseller, You Were Born Rich. To learn more about
Bob, visit www.bobproctor.com.

Biographies

195

JAMES ARTHUR RAY
A student of the principles of true wealth and
prosperity his entire life, James developed The
Science of Success and Harmonic Wealth®,
which teaches people how to receive unlimited results in all areas: financially, relationally,
intellectually, physically, and spiritually. His personal performance
systems, corporate training programs, and coaching aids are utilized worldwide, and he speaks regularly on the subjects of true
wealth, success, and human potential. James is also an expert on
many Eastern, indigenous, and mystical traditions. Visit his website
at www.jamesray.com.

DAVID SCHIRMER
David Schirmer is a highly successful share
trader, investor, and investment trainer who
conducts workshops, seminars, and courses.
His company, Trading Edge, teaches people
how to create unlimited income by developing a mindset that is conducive to wealth. Schirmer's analysis of
the Australian and overseas share and commodity markets is held
in high regard due to his regular accuracy. To learn more, visit
www.tradingedge.com.au.

MARCI SHIMOFF, MBA
Marci Shimoff is co-author of the enormously
successful Chicken Soup for the Woman's Soul
and Chicken Soup for the Mother's Soul. She is
a transformational leader who speaks pas-

196

Biographies

sionately about personal development and happiness. Her work
is specially geared toward enhancing women's lives. She is also
co-founder and president of The Esteem Group, a company that
offers self-esteem and inspirational programs for women. Her
website is www.marcishimoff.com.

DR. JOE VlTALE, MSC.D.
Joe Vitale, homeless twenty years ago, is
now considered to be one of the top marketing specialists in the world. He has written
numerous books concerning principles of
success and abundance, including Life's Missing Instruction Manual, Hypnotic Writing, and The Attractor Factor,
all number one bestsellers. Joe holds a doctorate degree in Metaphysical Science and is a certified hypnotherapist, metaphysical
practitioner, ordained minister, and Chi Kung healer. Visit www
.mrfire.com to learn more.

DR. DENIS WAITLEY, P H . D .
Dr. Waitley is one of America's most respected authors, lecturers, and consultants on
high-performance human achievement. He
was employed to train NASA astronauts, and
later implemented the same program with
Olympic athletes. His audio album, The Psychology of Winning, is
the all-time bestselling program on self-mastery, and he is also the
author of fifteen non-fiction books, including several international
bestsellers. His website is www.waitley.com.

Biographies 197

NEALE DONALD WALSCH
Neale Donald Walsch is a modern-day spiritual messenger and the bestselling author
of the groundbreaking three-book Conversations with God series, which broke all records
on the New York Times bestsellers list. Neale
has published twenty-two books, as well as video and audio
programs, and travels the world carrying the message of a
New Spirituality. He may be contacted at www.nealedonald
walsch.com.

WALLACE WATTLES (1860-1911)
American-born Wallace Wattles spent many
years studying various religions and philosophies before he began to write about the
practice of "New Thought" principles. Wattles's many books have had a significant impact on today's prosperity and success teachers. His most famous
work is the prosperity classic The Science of Getting Rich, published
in 1910.
S

FRED ALAN WOLF, PH.D

Fred Alan Wolf is a physicist, writer, and lecturer, with a doctorate in theoretical physics.
Dr. Wolf has taught at universities throughout the world, and his work in quantum
physics and consciousness is well known
through his writing. He is the author of twelve books, including

198

Biographies

Taking the Quantum Leap, which won the National Book Award.
Today Dr. Wolf continues to write and lecture throughout the
world and carry out his fascinating research into the relationship
of quantum physics and consciousness. Visit his website, www
.fredaIanwoIf.com.

May The Secret bring you love and
joy for your entire existence.
That is my intention for you,
and for the world.

To experience more, visit www.thesecret.tv.

THE FOUR
AGREEMENTS

Also by don Miguel Ruiz

THE FIFTH AGREEMENT
A Practical Guide to Self-Mastery

THE FOUR AGREEMENTS COMPANION BOOK
Using The Four Agreements to Master the Dream of Your Life

THE MASTERY OF LOVE
A Practical Guide to the Art of Relationship

PRAYERS
A Communion with our Creator

THE VOICE OF KNOWLEDGE
A Practical Guide to Inner Peace

LOS CUATRO ACUERDOS
Una guía práctica para la libertad personal

CUADERNO DE TRABAJO DE LOS CUATRO ACUERDOS
Utiliza Los Cuatro Acuerdos para gobernar el sueño de tu vida

LA MAESTRÍA DEL AMOR
Una guía práctica para el arte de las relaciones

ORACIONES
Una comunión con nuestro Creador

LA VOZ DEL CONOCIMIENTO
Una guía práctica para la paz interior

A Practical Guide to Personal Freedom

A
Toltec

THE FOUR
AGREEMENTS
Wisdom
Book
DON

MIGUEL RUIZ

AMBER-ALLEN PUBLISHING
SAN RAFAEL, CALIFORNIA

Copyright © 1997 by Miguel Angel Ruiz, M.D.
Published by Amber-Allen Publishing, Inc.
P. O. Box 6657
San Rafael, California 94903
Editorial: Janet Mills
Cover Illustration: Nicholas Wilton
Cover Design: Michele Wetherbee
Author Photo: Ellen Denuto
All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part
without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may
quote brief passages in a review; nor may any part of this book be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other, without written
permission from the publisher.
Note: The term “black magic” is not meant to convey racial connotation; it is
merely used to describe the use of magic for adverse or harmful purposes.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ruiz, Miguel, 1952– The four agreements : a practical guide to personal
freedom/Miguel Ruiz. p. cm. — (A Toltec wisdom book) (alk. paper)
1. Conduct of life. 2. Toltec philosophy — Miscellanea.
I. Title. II. Series: Ruiz, Miguel, 1952– Toltec wisdom book.
BJ1581. 2. R85 1997
299′.792 — dc21
97-18256 CIP
ISBN 978-1-934408-01-8

To the Circle of Fire; those who have gone before, those who are present, and
those who have yet to come.

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
1
Domestication and
the Dream of the Planet
2

THE FIRST AGREEMENT
Be Impeccable with Your Word
3

THE SECOND AGREEMENT
Don’t Take Anything Personally
4

THE THIRD AGREEMENT
Don’t Make Assumptions
5

THE FOURTH AGREEMENT
Always Do Your Best
6

THE TOLTEC PATH TO FREEDOM
Breaking Old Agreements
7

THE NEW DREAM
Heaven on Earth

Prayers

Acknowledgments
I WOULD LIKE TO HUMBLY ACKNOWLEDGE MY mother Sarita, who
taught me unconditional love; my father Jose Luis, who taught me discipline; my
grandfather Leonardo Macias, who gave me the key to unlock the Toltec
mysteries; and my sons Miguel, Jose Luis, and Leonardo.
I wish to express my deep affection and appreciation to the dedication of
Gaya Jenkins and Trey Jenkins.
I would like to extend my profound gratitude to Janet Mills — publisher,
editor, believer. I am also abidingly grateful to Ray Chambers for lighting the
way.
I would like to honor my dear friend Gini Gentry, an amazing “brain” whose
faith touched my heart.
I would like to pay tribute to the many people who have given freely of their
time, hearts, and resources to support the teachings. A partial list includes: Gae
Buckley, Ted and Peggy Raess, Christinea Johnson, Judy “Red” Fruhbauer,
Vicki Molinar, David and Linda Dibble, Bernadette Vigil, Cynthia Wootton,
Alan Clark, Rita Rivera, Catherine Chase, Stephanie Bureau, Todd Kaprielian,
Glenna Quigley, Allan and Randi Hardman, Cindee Pascoe, Terry and Chuck
Cowgill, Roberto and Diane Paez, Siri Gian Singh Khalsa, Heather Ash, Larry
Andrews, Judy Silver, Carolyn Hipp, Kim Hofer, Mersedeh Kheradmand,
Diana and Sky Ferguson, Keri Kropidlowski, Steve Hasenburg, Dara Salour,
Joaquin Galvan, Woodie Bobb, Rachel Guerrero, Mark Gershon, Collette
Michaan, Brandt Morgan, Katherine Kilgore (Kitty Kaur), Michael Gilardy,
Laura Haney, Marc Cloptin, Wendy Bobb, Ed Fox, Yari Jaeda, Mary Carroll
Nelson, Amari Magdelana, JaneAnn Dow, Russ Venable, Gu and Maya Khalsa,
Mataji Rosita, Fred and Marion Vatinelli, Diane Laurent, V.J. Polich, Gail
Dawn Price, Barbara Simon, Patti Torres, Kaye Thompson, Ramin Yazdani,
Linda Lightfoot, Terry Gorton, Dorothy Lee, J.J. Frank, Jennifer and Jeanne
Jenkins, George Gorton, Tita Weems, Shelley Wolf, Gigi Boyce, Morgan
Drasmin, Eddie Von Sonn, Sydney de Jong, Peg Hackett Cancienne, Germaine
Bautista, Pilar Mendoza, Debbie Rund Caldwell, Bea La Scalla, Eduardo
Rabasa, and The Cowboy.

The Toltec
THOUSANDS OF YEARS AGO, THE TOLTEC WERE known throughout
southern Mexico as “women and men of knowledge.” Anthropologists have
spoken of the Toltec as a nation or a race, but, in fact, the Toltec were scientists
and artists who formed a society to explore and conserve the spiritual
knowledge and practices of the ancient ones. They came together as masters
(naguals) and students at Teotihuacan, the ancient city of pyramids outside
Mexico City known as the place where “Man Becomes God.”
Over the millennia, the naguals were forced to conceal the ancestral wisdom
and maintain its existence in obscurity. European conquest, coupled with
rampant misuse of personal power by a few of the apprentices, made it
necessary to shield the knowledge from those who were not prepared to use it
wisely or who might intentionally misuse it for personal gain.
Fortunately, the esoteric Toltec knowledge was embodied and passed on
through generations by different lineages of naguals. Though it remained veiled
in secrecy for hundreds of years, ancient prophecies foretold the coming of an
age when it would be necessary to return the wisdom to the people. Now, don
Miguel Ruiz, a nagual from the Eagle Knight lineage, has been guided to share
with us the powerful teachings of the Toltec.
Toltec knowledge arises from the same essential unity of truth as all the
sacred esoteric traditions found around the world. Though it is not a religion, it
honors all the spiritual masters who have taught on the earth. While it does
embrace spirit, it is most accurately described as a way of life, distinguished
by the ready accessibility of happiness and love.

INTRODUCTION

The Smokey Mirror
THREE THOUSAND YEARS AGO, THERE WAS A HUMAN just like you
and me who lived near a city surrounded by mountains. The human was
studying to become a medicine man, to learn the knowledge of his ancestors,
but he didn’t completely agree with everything he was learning. In his heart, he
felt there must be something more.
One day, as he slept in a cave, he dreamed that he saw his own body
sleeping. He came out of the cave on the night of a new moon. The sky was
clear, and he could see millions of stars. Then something happened inside of
him that transformed his life forever. He looked at his hands, he felt his body,
and he heard his own voice say, “I am made of light; I am made of stars.”
He looked at the stars again, and he realized that it’s not the stars that create
light, but rather light that creates the stars. “Everything is made of light,” he
said, “and the space in-between isn’t empty.” And he knew that everything that
exists is one living being, and that light is the messenger of life, because it is
alive and contains all information.
Then he realized that although he was made of stars, he was not those stars.
“I am in-between the stars,” he thought. So he called the stars the tonal and the
light between the stars the nagual, and he knew that what created the harmony
and space between the two is Life or Intent. Without Life, the tonal and the
nagual could not exist. Life is the force of the absolute, the supreme, the Creator
who creates everything.
This is what he discovered: Everything in existence is a manifestation of the
one living being we call God. Everything is God. And he came to the
conclusion that human perception is merely light perceiving light. He also saw
that matter is a mirror — everything is a mirror that reflects light and creates
images of that light — and the world of illusion, the Dream, is just like smoke
which doesn’t allow us to see what we really are. “The real us is pure love,
pure light,” he said.
This realization changed his life. Once he knew what he really was, he
looked around at other humans and the rest of nature, and he was amazed at
what he saw. He saw himself in everything — in every human, in every animal,
in every tree, in the water, in the rain, in the clouds, in the earth. And he saw
that Life mixed the tonal and the nagual in different ways to create billions of
manifestations of Life.

In those few moments he comprehended everything. He was very excited,
and his heart was filled with peace. He could hardly wait to tell his people
what he had discovered. But there were no words to explain it. He tried to tell
the others, but they could not understand. They could see that he had changed,
that something beautiful was radiating from his eyes and his voice. They
noticed that he no longer had judgment about anything or anyone. He was no
longer like anyone else.
He could understand everyone very well, but no one could understand him.
They believed that he was an incarnation of God, and he smiled when he heard
this and he said, “It is true. I am God. But you are also God. We are the same,
you and I. We are images of light. We are God.” But still the people didn’t
understand him.
He had discovered that he was a mirror for the rest of the people, a mirror in
which he could see himself. “Everyone is a mirror,” he said. He saw himself in
everyone, but nobody saw him as themselves. And he realized that everyone
was dreaming, but without awareness, without knowing what they really are.
They couldn’t see him as themselves because there was a wall of fog or smoke
between the mirrors. And that wall of fog was made by the interpretation of
images of light — the Dream of humans.
Then he knew that he would soon forget all that he had learned. He wanted to
remember all the visions he had had, so he decided to call himself the Smokey
Mirror so that he would always know that matter is a mirror and the smoke inbetween is what keeps us from knowing what we are. He said, “I am the
Smokey Mirror, because I am looking at myself in all of you, but we don’t
recognize each other because of the smoke in-between us. That smoke is the
Dream, and the mirror is you, the dreamer.”

Living is easy with eyes closed, misunderstanding all you see….
— John Lennon

1

Domestication and the Dream of the Planet
WHAT YOU ARE SEEING AND HEARING RIGHT NOW IS nothing but a
dream. You are dreaming right now in this moment. You are dreaming with the
brain awake.
Dreaming is the main function of the mind, and the mind dreams twenty-four
hours a day. It dreams when the brain is awake, and it also dreams when the
brain is asleep. The difference is that when the brain is awake, there is a
material frame that makes us perceive things in a linear way. When we go to
sleep we do not have the frame, and the dream has the tendency to change
constantly.
Humans are dreaming all the time. Before we were born the humans before
us created a big outside dream that we will call society’s dream or the dream
of the planet. The dream of the planet is the collective dream of billions of
smaller, personal dreams, which together create a dream of a family, a dream
of a community, a dream of a city, a dream of a country, and finally a dream of
the whole humanity. The dream of the planet includes all of society’s rules, its
beliefs, its laws, its religions, its different cultures and ways to be, its
governments, schools, social events, and holidays.
We are born with the capacity to learn how to dream, and the humans who
live before us teach us how to dream the way society dreams. The outside
dream has so many rules that when a new human is born, we hook the child’s
attention and introduce these rules into his or her mind. The outside dream uses
Mom and Dad, the schools, and religion to teach us how to dream.
Attention is the ability we have to discriminate and to focus only on that
which we want to perceive. We can perceive millions of things simultaneously,
but using our attention, we can hold whatever we want to perceive in the
foreground of our mind. The adults around us hooked our attention and put
information into our minds through repetition. That is the way we learned
everything we know.
By using our attention we learned a whole reality, a whole dream. We
learned how to behave in society: what to believe and what not to believe;
what is acceptable and what is not acceptable; what is good and what is bad;
what is beautiful and what is ugly; what is right and what is wrong. It was all
there already — all that knowledge, all those rules and concepts about how to
behave in the world.

When you were in school, you sat in a little chair and put your attention on
what the teacher was teaching you. When you went to church, you put your
attention on what the priest or minister was telling you. It is the same dynamic
with Mom and Dad, brothers and sisters: They were all trying to hook your
attention. We also learn to hook the attention of other humans, and we develop a
need for attention which can become very competitive. Children compete for
the attention of their parents, their teachers, their friends. “Look at me! Look at
what I’m doing! Hey, I’m here.” The need for attention becomes very strong and
continues into adulthood.
The outside dream hooks our attention and teaches us what to believe,
beginning with the language that we speak. Language is the code for
understanding and communication between humans. Every letter, every word in
each language is an agreement. We call this a page in a book; the word page is
an agreement that we understand. Once we understand the code, our attention is
hooked and the energy is transferred from one person to another.
It was not your choice to speak English. You didn’t choose your religion or
your moral values — they were already there before you were born. We never
had the opportunity to choose what to believe or what not to believe. We never
chose even the smallest of these agreements. We didn’t even choose our own
name.
As children, we didn’t have the opportunity to choose our beliefs, but we
agreed with the information that was passed to us from the dream of the planet
via other humans. The only way to store information is by agreement. The
outside dream may hook our attention, but if we don’t agree, we don’t store that
information. As soon as we agree, we believe it, and this is called faith. To
have faith is to believe unconditionally.
That’s how we learn as children. Children believe everything adults say. We
agree with them, and our faith is so strong that the belief system controls our
whole dream of life. We didn’t choose these beliefs, and we may have rebelled
against them, but we were not strong enough to win the rebellion. The result is
surrender to the beliefs with our agreement.
I call this process the domestication of humans. And through this
domestication we learn how to live and how to dream. In human domestication,
the information from the outside dream is conveyed to the inside dream,
creating our whole belief system. First the child is taught the names of things:
Mom, Dad, milk, bottle. Day by day, at home, at school, at church, and from
television, we are told how to live, what kind of behavior is acceptable. The

outside dream teaches us how to be a human. We have a whole concept of what
a “woman” is and what a “man” is. And we also learn to judge: We judge
ourselves, judge other people, judge the neighbors.
Children are domesticated the same way that we domesticate a dog, a cat, or
any other animal. In order to teach a dog we punish the dog and we give it
rewards. We train our children whom we love so much the same way that we
train any domesticated animal: with a system of punishment and reward. We are
told, “You’re a good boy,” or “You’re a good girl,” when we do what Mom
and Dad want us to do. When we don’t, we are “a bad girl” or “a bad boy.”
When we went against the rules we were punished; when we went along
with the rules we got a reward. We were punished many times a day, and we
were also rewarded many times a day. Soon we became afraid of being
punished and also afraid of not receiving the reward. The reward is the
attention that we got from our parents or from other people like siblings,
teachers, and friends. We soon develop a need to hook other people’s attention
in order to get the reward.
The reward feels good, and we keep doing what others want us to do in
order to get the reward. With that fear of being punished and that fear of not
getting the reward, we start pretending to be what we are not, just to please
others, just to be good enough for someone else. We try to please Mom and
Dad, we try to please the teachers at school, we try to please the church, and so
we start acting. We pretend to be what we are not because we are afraid of
being rejected. The fear of being rejected becomes the fear of not being good
enough. Eventually we become someone that we are not. We become a copy of
Mamma’s beliefs, Daddy’s beliefs, society’s beliefs, and religion’s beliefs.
All our normal tendencies are lost in the process of domestication. And when
we are old enough for our mind to understand, we learn the word no. The adults
say, “Don’t do this and don’t do that.” We rebel and say, “No!” We rebel
because we are defending our freedom. We want to be ourselves, but we are
very little, and the adults are big and strong. After a certain time we are afraid
because we know that every time we do something wrong we are going to be
punished.
The domestication is so strong that at a certain point in our lives we no
longer need anyone to domesticate us. We don’t need Mom or Dad, the school
or the church to domesticate us. We are so well trained that we are our own
domesticator. We are an autodomesticated animal. We can now domesticate
ourselves according to the same belief system we were given, and using the

same system of punishment and reward. We punish ourselves when we don’t
follow the rules according to our belief system; we reward ourselves when we
are the “good boy” or “good girl.”
The belief system is like a Book of Law that rules our mind. Without
question, whatever is in that Book of Law, is our truth. We base all of our
judgments according to the Book of Law, even if these judgments go against our
own inner nature. Even moral laws like the Ten Commandments are
programmed into our mind in the process of domestication. One by one, all
these agreements go into the Book of Law, and these agreements rule our
dream.
There is something in our minds that judges everybody and everything,
including the weather, the dog, the cat — everything. The inner Judge uses what
is in our Book of Law to judge everything we do and don’t do, everything we
think and don’t think, and everything we feel and don’t feel. Everything lives
under the tyranny of this Judge. Every time we do something that goes against
the Book of Law, the Judge says we are guilty, we need to be punished, we
should be ashamed. This happens many times a day, day after day, for all the
years of our lives.
There is another part of us that receives the judgments, and this part is called
the Victim. The Victim carries the blame, the guilt, and the shame. It is the part
of us that says, “Poor me, I’m not good enough, I’m not intelligent enough, I’m
not attractive enough, I’m not worthy of love, poor me.” The big Judge agrees
and says, “Yes, you are not good enough.” And this is all based on a belief
system that we never chose to believe. These beliefs are so strong, that even
years later when we are exposed to new concepts and try to make our own
decisions, we find that these beliefs still control our lives.
Whatever goes against the Book of Law will make you feel a funny sensation
in your solar plexus, and it’s called fear. Breaking the rules in the Book of Law
opens your emotional wounds, and your reaction is to create emotional poison.
Because everything that is in the Book of Law has to be true, anything that
challenges what you believe is going to make you feel unsafe. Even if the Book
of Law is wrong, it makes you feel safe.
That is why we need a great deal of courage to challenge our own beliefs.
Because even if we know we didn’t choose all these beliefs, it is also true that
we agreed to all of them. The agreement is so strong that even if we understand
the concept of it not being true, we feel the blame, the guilt, and the shame that
occur if we go against these rules.

Just as the government has a book of laws that rule the society’s dream, our
belief system is the Book of Laws that rules our personal dream. All these laws
exist in our mind, we believe them, and the Judge inside us bases everything on
these rules. The Judge decrees, and the Victim suffers the guilt and punishment.
But who says there is justice in this dream? True justice is paying only once for
each mistake. True injustice is paying more than once for each mistake.
How many times do we pay for one mistake? The answer is thousands of
times. The human is the only animal on earth that pays a thousand times for the
same mistake. The rest of the animals pay once for every mistake they make.
But not us. We have a powerful memory. We make a mistake, we judge
ourselves, we find ourselves guilty, and we punish ourselves. If justice exists,
then that was enough; we don’t need to do it again. But every time we
remember, we judge ourselves again, we are guilty again, and we punish
ourselves again, and again, and again. If we have a wife or husband he or she
also reminds us of the mistake, so we can judge ourselves again, punish
ourselves again, and find ourselves guilty again. Is this fair?
How many times do we make our spouse, our children, or our parents pay for
the same mistake? Every time we remember the mistake, we blame them again
and send them all the emotional poison we feel at the injustice, and then we
make them pay again for the same mistake. Is that justice? The Judge in the mind
is wrong because the belief system, the Book of Law, is wrong. The whole
dream is based on false law. Ninety-five percent of the beliefs we have stored
in our minds are nothing but lies, and we suffer because we believe all these
lies.
In the dream of the planet it is normal for humans to suffer, to live in fear,
and to create emotional dramas. The outside dream is not a pleasant dream; it is
a dream of violence, a dream of fear, a dream of war, a dream of injustice. The
personal dream of humans will vary, but globally it is mostly a nightmare. If we
look at human society we see a place so difficult to live in because it is ruled
by fear. Throughout the world we see human suffering, anger, revenge,
addictions, violence in the street, and tremendous injustice. It may exist at
different levels in different countries around the world, but fear is controlling
the outside dream.
If we compare the dream of human society with the description of hell that
religions all around the world have promulgated, we find they are exactly the
same. Religions say that hell is a place of punishment, a place of fear, pain, and
suffering, a place where the fire burns you. Fire is generated by emotions that

come from fear. Whenever we feel the emotions of anger, jealousy, envy, or
hate, we experience a fire burning within us. We are living in a dream of hell.
If you consider hell as a state of mind, then hell is all around us. Others may
warn us that if we don’t do what they say we should do, we will go to hell. Bad
news! We are already in hell, including the people who tell us that. No human
can condemn another to hell because we are already there. Others can put us
into a deeper hell, true. But only if we allow this to happen.
Every human has his or her own personal dream, and just like the society
dream, it is often ruled by fear. We learn to dream hell in our own life, in our
personal dream. The same fears manifest in different ways for each person, of
course, but we experience anger, jealousy, hate, envy, and other negative
emotions. Our personal dream can also become an ongoing nightmare where we
suffer and live in a state of fear. But we don’t need to dream a nightmare. It is
possible to enjoy a pleasant dream.
All of humanity is searching for truth, justice, and beauty. We are on an
eternal search for the truth because we only believe in the lies we have stored
in our mind. We are searching for justice because in the belief system we have,
there is no justice. We search for beauty because it doesn’t matter how
beautiful a person is, we don’t believe that person has beauty. We keep
searching and searching, when everything is already within us. There is no truth
to find. Wherever we turn our heads, all we see is the truth, but with the
agreements and beliefs we have stored in our mind, we have no eyes for this
truth.
We don’t see the truth because we are blind. What blinds us are all those
false beliefs we have in our mind. We have the need to be right and to make
others wrong. We trust what we believe, and our beliefs set us up for suffering.
It is as if we live in the middle of a fog that doesn’t let us see any further than
our own nose. We live in a fog that is not even real. This fog is a dream, your
personal dream of life — what you believe, all the concepts you have about
what you are, all the agreements you have made with others, with yourself, and
even with God.
Your whole mind is a fog which the Toltecs called a mitote (pronounced
MIH-TOE ′ -TAY ). Your mind is a dream where a thousand people talk at the
same time, and nobody understands each other. This is the condition of the
human mind — a big mitote, and with that big mitote you cannot see what you
really are. In India they call the mitote maya, which means illusion. It is the
personality’s notion of “I am.” Everything you believe about yourself and the

world, all the concepts and programming you have in your mind, are all the
mitote. We cannot see who we truly are; we cannot see that we are not free.
That is why humans resist life. To be alive is the biggest fear humans have.
Death is not the biggest fear we have; our biggest fear is taking the risk to be
alive — the risk to be alive and express what we really are. Just being
ourselves is the biggest fear of humans. We have learned to live our lives trying
to satisfy other people’s demands. We have learned to live by other people’s
points of view because of the fear of not being accepted and of not being good
enough for someone else.
During the process of domestication, we form an image of what perfection is
in order to try to be good enough. We create an image of how we should be in
order to be accepted by everybody. We especially try to please the ones who
love us, like Mom and Dad, big brothers and sisters, the priests and the teacher.
Trying to be good enough for them, we create an image of perfection, but we
don’t fit this image. We create this image, but this image is not real. We are
never going to be perfect from this point of view. Never!
Not being perfect, we reject ourselves. And the level of self-rejection
depends upon how effective the adults were in breaking our integrity. After
domestication it is no longer about being good enough for anybody else. We are
not good enough for ourselves because we don’t fit with our own image of
perfection. We cannot forgive ourselves for not being what we wish to be, or
rather what we believe we should be. We cannot forgive ourselves for not
being perfect.
We know we are not what we believe we are supposed to be and so we feel
false, frustrated, and dishonest. We try to hide ourselves, and we pretend to be
what we are not. The result is that we feel unauthentic and wear social masks to
keep others from noticing this. We are so afraid that somebody else will notice
that we are not what we pretend to be. We judge others according to our image
of perfection as well, and naturally they fall short of our expectations.
We dishonor ourselves just to please other people. We even do harm to our
physical bodies just to be accepted by others. You see teenagers taking drugs
just to avoid being rejected by other teenagers. They are not aware that the
problem is that they don’t accept themselves. They reject themselves because
they are not what they pretend to be. They wish to be a certain way, but they are
not, and for this they carry shame and guilt. Humans punish themselves
endlessly for not being what they believe they should be. They become very
self-abusive, and they use other people to abuse themselves as well.

But nobody abuses us more than we abuse ourselves, and it is the Judge, the
Victim, and the belief system that make us do this. True, we find people who
say their husband or wife, or mother or father, abused them, but you know that
we abuse ourselves much more than that. The way we judge ourselves is the
worst judge that ever existed. If we make a mistake in front of people, we try to
deny the mistake and cover it up. But as soon as we are alone, the Judge
becomes so strong, the guilt is so strong, and we feel so stupid, or so bad, or so
unworthy.
In your whole life nobody has ever abused you more than you have abused
yourself. And the limit of your self-abuse is exactly the limit that you will
tolerate from someone else. If someone abuses you a little more than you abuse
yourself, you will probably walk away from that person. But if someone abuses
you a little less than you abuse yourself, you will probably stay in the
relationship and tolerate it endlessly.
If you abuse yourself very badly, you can even tolerate someone who beats
you up, humiliates you, and treats you like dirt. Why? Because in your belief
system you say, “I deserve it. This person is doing me a favor by being with
me. I’m not worthy of love and respect. I’m not good enough.”
We have the need to be accepted and to be loved by others, but we cannot
accept and love ourselves. The more self-love we have, the less we will
experience self-abuse. Self-abuse comes from self-rejection, and self-rejection
comes from having an image of what it means to be perfect and never measuring
up to that ideal. Our image of perfection is the reason we reject ourselves; it is
why we don’t accept ourselves the way we are, and why we don’t accept
others the way they are.
PRELUDE TO A NEW DREAM
There are thousands of agreements you have made with yourself, with other
people, with your dream of life, with God, with society, with your parents, with
your spouse, with your children. But the most important agreements are the ones
you made with yourself. In these agreements you tell yourself who you are,
what you feel, what you believe, and how to behave. The result is what you call
your personality. In these agreements you say, “This is what I am. This is what I
believe. I can do certain things, and some things I cannot do. This is reality, that
is fantasy; this is possible, that is impossible.”
One single agreement is not such a problem, but we have many agreements

that make us suffer, that make us fail in life. If you want to live a life of joy and
fulfillment, you have to find the courage to break those agreements that are fearbased and claim your personal power. The agreements that come from fear
require us to expend a lot of energy, but the agreements that come from love
help us to conserve energy and even gain extra energy.
Each of us is born with a certain amount of personal power that we rebuild
every day after we rest. Unfortunately, we spend all our personal power first to
create all these agreements and then to keep these agreements. Our personal
power is dissipated by all the agreements we have created, and the result is that
we feel powerless. We have just enough power to survive each day, because
most of it is used to keep the agreements that trap us in the dream of the planet.
How can we change the entire dream of our life when we have no power to
change even the smallest agreement?
If we can see it is our agreements that rule our own life, and we don’t like
the dream of our life, we need to change the agreements. When we are finally
ready to change our agreements, there are four very powerful agreements that
will help us to break those agreements that come from fear and deplete our
energy.
Each time you break an agreement, all the power you used to create it returns
to you. If you adopt these four new agreements, they will create enough
personal power for you to change the entire system of your old agreements.
You need a very strong will in order to adopt The Four Agreements — but if
you can begin to live your life with these agreements, the transformation in your
life will be amazing. You will see the drama of hell disappear right before your
very eyes. Instead of living in a dream of hell, you will be creating a new
dream — your personal dream of heaven.

2
THE FIRST AGREEMENT

Be Impeccable with Your Word
THE FIRST AGREEMENT IS THE MOST IMPORTANT ONE and also the
most difficult one to honor. It is so important that with just this first agreement
you will be able to transcend to the level of existence I call heaven on earth.
The first agreement is to be impeccable with your word. It sounds very
simple, but it is very, very powerful.
Why your word? Your word is the power that you have to create. Your word
is the gift that comes directly from God. The Gospel of John in the Bible,
speaking of the creation of the universe, says, “In the beginning was the word,
and the word was with God, and the word is God.” Through the word you
express your creative power. It is through the word that you manifest
everything. Regardless of what language you speak, your intent manifests
through the word. What you dream, what you feel, and what you really are, will
all be manifested through the word.
The word is not just a sound or a written symbol. The word is a force; it is
the power you have to express and communicate, to think, and thereby to create
the events in your life. You can speak. What other animal on the planet can
speak? The word is the most powerful tool you have as a human; it is the tool of
magic. But like a sword with two edges, your word can create the most
beautiful dream, or your word can destroy everything around you. One edge is
the misuse of the word, which creates a living hell. The other edge is the
impeccability of the word, which will only create beauty, love, and heaven on
earth. Depending upon how it is used, the word can set you free, or it can
enslave you even more than you know. All the magic you possess is based on
your word. Your word is pure magic, and misuse of your word is black magic.
The word is so powerful that one word can change a life or destroy the lives
of millions of people. Some years ago one man in Germany, by the use of the
word, manipulated a whole country of the most intelligent people. He led them
into a world war with just the power of his word. He convinced others to
commit the most atrocious acts of violence. He activated people’s fear with the
word, and like a big explosion, there was killing and war all around the world.
All over the world humans destroyed other humans because they were afraid of
each other. Hitler’s word, based on fear-generated beliefs and agreements, will
be remembered for centuries.
The human mind is like a fertile ground where seeds are continually being

planted. The seeds are opinions, ideas, and concepts. You plant a seed, a
thought, and it grows. The word is like a seed, and the human mind is so fertile!
The only problem is that too often it is fertile for the seeds of fear. Every human
mind is fertile, but only for those kinds of seeds it is prepared for. What is
important is to see which kind of seeds our mind is fertile for, and to prepare it
to receive the seeds of love.
Take the example of Hitler: He sent out all those seeds of fear, and they grew
very strong and beautifully achieved massive destruction. Seeing the awesome
power of the word, we must understand what power comes out of our mouths.
One fear or doubt planted in our mind can create an endless drama of events.
One word is like a spell, and humans use the word like black magicians,
thoughtlessly putting spells on each other.
Every human is a magician, and we can either put a spell on someone with
our word or we can release someone from a spell. We cast spells all the time
with our opinions. An example: I see a friend and give him an opinion that just
popped into my mind. I say, “Hmmm! I see that kind of color in your face in
people who are going to get cancer.” If he listens to the word, and if he agrees,
he will have cancer in less than one year. That is the power of the word.
During our domestication, our parents and siblings gave their opinions about
us without even thinking. We believed these opinions and we lived in fear over
these opinions, like not being good at swimming, or sports, or writing.
Someone gives an opinion and says, “Look, this girl is ugly!” The girl listens,
believes she is ugly, and grows up with the idea that she is ugly. It doesn’t
matter how beautiful she is; as long as she has that agreement, she will believe
that she is ugly. That is the spell she is under.
By hooking our attention, the word can enter our mind and change a whole
belief for better or for worse. Another example: You may believe you are
stupid, and you may have believed this for as long as you can remember. This
agreement can be very tricky, causing you to do a lot of things just to ensure that
you are stupid. You may do something and think to yourself, “I wish I were
smart, but I must be stupid or I wouldn’t have done that.” The mind goes in
hundreds of different directions, and we could spend days getting hooked by
just that one belief in our own stupidity.
Then one day someone hooks your attention and using the word, lets you
know that you are not stupid. You believe what the person says and make a new
agreement. As a result, you no longer feel or act stupid. A whole spell is
broken, just by the power of the word. Conversely, if you believe you are

stupid, and someone hooks your attention and says, “Yes, you are really the
most stupid person I have ever met,” the agreement will be reinforced and
become even stronger.

Now let us see what the word impeccability means. Impeccability means
“without sin.” Impeccable comes from the Latin pecatus, which means “sin.”
The im in impeccable means “without,” so impeccable means “without sin.”
Religions talk about sin and sinners, but let’s understand what it really means to
sin. A sin is anything that you do which goes against yourself. Everything you
feel or believe or say that goes against yourself is a sin. You go against yourself
when you judge or blame yourself for anything. Being without sin is exactly the
opposite. Being impeccable is not going against yourself. When you are
impeccable, you take responsibility for your actions, but you do not judge or
blame yourself.
From this point of view, the whole concept of sin changes from something
moral or religious to something commonsense. Sin begins with rejection of
yourself. Self-rejection is the biggest sin that you commit. In religious terms
self-rejection is a “mortal sin,” which leads to death. Impeccability, on the
other hand, leads to life.
Being impeccable with your word is not using the word against yourself. If I
see you in the street and I call you stupid, it appears that I’m using the word
against you. But really I’m using my word against myself, because you’re going
to hate me for this, and your hating me is not good for me. Therefore, if I get
angry and with my word send all that emotional poison to you, I’m using the
word against myself.
If I love myself I will express that love in my interactions with you, and then
I am being impeccable with the word, because that action will produce a like
reaction. If I love you, then you will love me. If I insult you, you will insult me.
If I have gratitude for you, you will have gratitude for me. If I’m selfish with
you, you will be selfish with me. If I use the word to put a spell on you, you are
going to put a spell on me.
Being impeccable with your word is the correct use of your energy; it means
to use your energy in the direction of truth and love for yourself. If you make an
agreement with yourself to be impeccable with your word, just with that
intention, the truth will manifest through you and clean all the emotional poison
that exists within you. But making this agreement is difficult because we have

learned to do precisely the opposite. We have learned to lie as a habit of our
communication with others and more importantly with ourselves. We are not
impeccable with the word.
The power of the word is completely misused in hell. We use the word to
curse, to blame, to find guilt, to destroy. Of course, we also use it in the right
way, but not too often. Mostly we use the word to spread our personal poison
— to express anger, jealousy, envy, and hate. The word is pure magic — the
most powerful gift we have as humans — and we use it against ourselves. We
plan revenge. We create chaos with the word. We use the word to create hate
between different races, between different people, between families, between
nations. We misuse the word so often, and this misuse is how we create and
perpetuate the dream of hell. Misuse of the word is how we pull each other
down and keep each other in a state of fear and doubt. Because the word is the
magic that humans possess and misuse of the word is black magic, we are using
black magic all the time without knowing that our word is magic at all.
There was a woman, for example, who was intelligent and had a very good
heart. She had a daughter whom she adored and loved very much. One night she
came home from a very bad day at work, tired, full of emotional tension, and
with a terrible headache. She wanted peace and quiet, but her daughter was
singing and jumping happily. The daughter was unaware of how her mother was
feeling; she was in her own world, in her own dream. She felt so wonderful,
and she was jumping and singing louder and louder, expressing her joy and her
love. She was singing so loud that it made her mother’s headache even worse,
and at a certain moment, the mother lost control. Angrily she looked at her
beautiful little girl and said, “Shut up! You have an ugly voice. Can you just
shut up!”
The truth is that the mother’s tolerance for any noise was nonexistent; it was
not that the little girl’s voice was ugly. But the daughter believed what her
mother said, and in that moment she made an agreement with herself. After that
she no longer sang, because she believed her voice was ugly and would bother
anyone who heard it. She became shy at school, and if she was asked to sing,
she refused. Even speaking to others became difficult for her. Everything
changed in the little girl because of this new agreement: She believed she must
repress her emotions in order to be accepted and loved.
Whenever we hear an opinion and believe it, we make an agreement, and it
becomes part of our belief system. This little girl grew up, and even though she
had a beautiful voice, she never sang again. She developed a whole complex

from one spell. This spell was cast upon her by the one who loved her the most:
her own mother. Her mother didn’t notice what she did with her word. She
didn’t notice that she used black magic and put a spell on her daughter. She
didn’t know the power of her word, and therefore she isn’t to blame. She did
what her own mother, father, and others had done to her in many ways. They
misused the word.
How many times do we do this with our own children? We give them these
types of opinions and our children carry that black magic for years and years.
People who love us do black magic on us, but they don’t know what they do.
That is why we must forgive them; they don’t know what they do.
Another example: You awake in the morning feeling very happy. You feel so
wonderful, you stay one or two hours in front of the mirror, making yourself
beautiful. Well, one of your best friends says, “What has happened to you? You
look so ugly. Look at the dress you are wearing; you look ridiculous.” That’s it;
that is enough to put you all the way down in hell. Maybe this girlfriend just
told you this to hurt you. And, she did. She gave you an opinion with all the
power of her word behind it. If you accept the opinion, it becomes an
agreement now, and you put all your power into that opinion. That opinion
becomes black magic.
These types of spells are difficult to break. The only thing that can break a
spell is to make a new agreement based on truth. The truth is the most important
part of being impeccable with your word. On one side of the sword are the lies
which create black magic, and on the other side of the sword is the truth which
has the power to break the spell of black magic. Only the truth will set us free.

Looking at everyday human interactions, imagine how many times we cast
spells on each other with our word. Over time this interaction has become the
worst form of black magic, and we call it gossip.
Gossip is black magic at its very worst because it is pure poison. We
learned how to gossip by agreement. When we were children, we heard the
adults around us gossiping all the time, openly giving their opinions about other
people. They even had opinions about people they didn’t know. Emotional
poison was transferred along with the opinions, and we learned this as the
normal way to communicate.
Gossiping has become the main form of communication in human society. It
has become the way we feel close to each other, because it makes us feel better

to see someone else feel as badly as we do. There is an old expression that
says, “Misery likes company,” and people who are suffering in hell don’t want
to be all alone. Fear and suffering are an important part of the dream of the
planet; they are how the dream of the planet keeps us down.
Using the analogy of the human mind as a computer, gossip can be compared
to a computer virus. A computer virus is a piece of computer language written
in the same language all the other codes are written in, but with a harmful intent.
This code is inserted into the program of your computer when you least expect
it and most of the time without your awareness. After this code has been
introduced, your computer doesn’t work quite right, or it doesn’t function at all
because the codes get so mixed up with so many conflicting messages that it
stops producing good results.
Human gossip works exactly the same way. For example, you are beginning a
new class with a new teacher and you have looked forward to it for a long time.
On the first day of class, you run into someone who took the class before, who
tells you, “Oh that instructor was such a pompous jerk! He didn’t know what he
was talking about, and he was a pervert too, so watch out!”
You are immediately imprinted with the word and the emotional code the
person had when saying this, but what you are not aware of is his or her
motivation in telling you. This person could be angry for failing the class or
simply making an assumption based on fears and prejudices, but because you
have learned to ingest information like a child, some part of you believes the
gossip, and you go on to the class. As the teacher speaks, you feel the poison
come up inside you and you don’t realize you see the teacher through the eyes of
the person who gave you that gossip. Then you start talking to other people in
the class about this, and they start to see the teacher in the same way: as a jerk
and a pervert. You really hate the class, and soon you decide to drop out. You
blame the teacher, but it is gossip that is to blame.
All of this mess can be caused by one little computer virus. One little piece
of misinformation can break down communication between people, causing
every person it touches to become infected and contagious to others. Imagine
that every single time others gossip to you, they insert a computer virus into
your mind, causing you to think a little less clearly every time. Then imagine
that in an effort to clean up your own confusion and get some relief from the
poison, you gossip and spread these viruses to someone else.
Now imagine this pattern going on in a never-ending chain between all the
humans on earth. The result is a world full of humans who can only read

information through circuits that are clogged with a poisonous, contagious
virus. Once again, this poisonous virus is what the Toltecs called the mitote, the
chaos of a thousand different voices all trying to talk at once in the mind.
Even worse are the black magicians or “computer hackers” who intentionally
spread the virus. Think back to a time when you or someone you know was
angry with someone else and desired revenge. In order to seek revenge you said
something to or about that person with the intention of spreading poison and
making that person feel bad about him- or herself. As children we do this quite
thoughtlessly, but as we grow older we become much more calculated in our
efforts to bring other people down. Then we lie to ourselves and say that
person received a just punishment for their wrongdoing.
When we see the world through a computer virus, it is easy to justify the
cruelest behavior. What we don’t see is that misuse of our word is putting us
deeper into hell.

For years we have received the gossip and spells from the words of others,
but also from the way we use our word with ourselves. We talk to ourselves
constantly and most of the time we say things like, “Oh, I look fat, I look ugly.
I’m getting old, I’m losing my hair. I’m stupid, I never understand anything. I
will never be good enough, and I’m never going to be perfect.” Do you see how
we use the word against ourselves? We must begin to understand what the word
is and what the word does. If you understand the first agreement, be impeccable
with your word, you begin to see all the changes that can happen in your life.
Changes first in the way you deal with yourself, and later in the way you deal
with other people, especially those you love the most.
Consider how many times you have gossiped about the person you love the
most to gain the support of others for your point of view. How many times have
you hooked other people’s attention, and spread poison about your loved one in
order to make your opinion right? Your opinion is nothing but your point of
view. It is not necessarily true. Your opinion comes from your beliefs, your
own ego, and your own dream. We create all this poison and spread it to others
just so we can feel right about our own point of view.
If we adopt the first agreement, and become impeccable with our word, any
emotional poison will eventually be cleaned from our mind and from our
communication in our personal relationships, including with our pet dog or cat.
Impeccability of the word will also give you immunity from anyone putting a

negative spell on you. You will only receive a negative idea if your mind is
fertile ground for that idea. When you become impeccable with your word, your
mind is no longer fertile ground for words that come from black magic. Instead,
it is fertile for the words that come from love. You can measure the
impeccability of your word by your level of self-love. How much you love
yourself and how you feel about yourself are directly proportionate to the
quality and integrity of your word. When you are impeccable with your word,
you feel good; you feel happy and at peace.
You can transcend the dream of hell just by making the agreement to be
impeccable with your word. Right now I am planting that seed in your mind.
Whether or not the seed grows depends upon how fertile your mind is for the
seeds of love. It is up to you to make this agreement with yourself: I am
impeccable with my word. Nurture this seed, and as it grows in your mind, it
will generate more seeds of love to replace the seeds of fear. This first
agreement will change the kind of seeds your mind is fertile for.
Be impeccable with your word. This is the first agreement that you should
make if you want to be free, if you want to be happy, if you want to transcend
the level of existence that is hell. It is very powerful. Use the word in the
correct way. Use the word to share your love. Use white magic, beginning with
yourself. Tell yourself how wonderful you are, how great you are. Tell yourself
how much you love yourself. Use the word to break all those teeny, tiny
agreements that make you suffer.
It is possible. It is possible because I did it, and I am no better than you. No,
we are exactly the same. We have the same kind of brain, the same kind of
bodies; we are humans. If I was able to break those agreements and create new
agreements, then you can do the same. If I can be impeccable with my word,
why not you? Just this one agreement can change your whole life. Impeccability
of the word can lead you to personal freedom, to huge success and abundance;
it can take away all fear and transform it into joy and love.
Just imagine what you can create with impeccability of the word. With the
impeccability of the word you can transcend the dream of fear and live a
different life. You can live in heaven in the middle of thousands of people
living in hell because you are immune to that hell. You can attain the kingdom
of heaven from this one agreement: Be impeccable with your word.

3
THE SECOND AGREEMENT

Don’t Take Anything Personally
THE NEXT THREE AGREEMENTS ARE REALLY BORN from the first
agreement. The second agreement is don’t take anything personally.
Whatever happens around you, don’t take it personally. Using an earlier
example, if I see you on the street and I say, “Hey, you are so stupid,” without
knowing you, it’s not about you; it’s about me. If you take it personally, then
perhaps you believe you are stupid. Maybe you think to yourself, “How does he
know? Is he clairvoyant, or can everybody see how stupid I am?”
You take it personally because you agree with whatever was said. As soon
as you agree, the poison goes through you, and you are trapped in the dream of
hell. What causes you to be trapped is what we call personal importance.
Personal importance, or taking things personally, is the maximum expression of
selfishness because we make the assumption that everything is about “me.”
During the period of our education, or our domestication, we learn to take
everything personally. We think we are responsible for everything. Me, me, me,
always me!
Nothing other people do is because of you. It is because of themselves. All
people live in their own dream, in their own mind; they are in a completely
different world from the one we live in. When we take something personally,
we make the assumption that they know what is in our world, and we try to
impose our world on their world.
Even when a situation seems so personal, even if others insult you directly, it
has nothing to do with you. What they say, what they do, and the opinions they
give are according to the agreements they have in their own minds. Their point
of view comes from all the programming they received during domestication.
If someone gives you an opinion and says, “Hey, you look so fat,” don’t take
it personally, because the truth is that this person is dealing with his or her own
feelings, beliefs, and opinions. That person tried to send poison to you and if
you take it personally, then you take that poison and it becomes yours. Taking
things personally makes you easy prey for these predators, the black magicians.
They can hook you easily with one little opinion and feed you whatever poison
they want, and because you take it personally, you eat it up.
You eat all their emotional garbage, and now it becomes your garbage. But if
you do not take it personally, you are immune in the middle of hell. Immunity to
poison in the middle of hell is the gift of this agreement.

When you take things personally, then you feel offended, and your reaction is
to defend your beliefs and create conflicts. You make something big out of
something so little, because you have the need to be right and make everybody
else wrong. You also try hard to be right by giving them your own opinions. In
the same way, whatever you feel and do is just a projection of your own
personal dream, a reflection of your own agreements. What you say, what you
do, and the opinions you have are according to the agreements you have made
— and these opinions have nothing to do with me.
It is not important to me what you think about me, and I don’t take what you
think personally. I don’t take it personally when people say, “Miguel, you are
the best,” and I also don’t take it personally when they say, “Miguel, you are the
worst.” I know that when you are happy you will tell me, “Miguel, you are such
an angel!” But, when you are mad at me you will say, “Oh, Miguel, you are
such a devil! You are so disgusting. How can you say those things?” Either
way, it does not affect me because I know what I am. I don’t have the need to be
accepted. I don’t have the need to have someone tell me, “Miguel, you are
doing so good!” or “How dare you do that!”
No, I don’t take it personally. Whatever you think, whatever you feel, I know
is your problem and not my problem. It is the way you see the world. It is
nothing personal, because you are dealing with yourself, not with me. Others
are going to have their own opinion according to their belief system, so nothing
they think about me is really about me, but it is about them.
You may even tell me, “Miguel, what you are saying is hurting me.” But it is
not what I am saying that is hurting you; it is that you have wounds that I touch
by what I have said. You are hurting yourself. There is no way that I can take
this personally. Not because I don’t believe in you or don’t trust you, but
because I know that you see the world with different eyes, with your eyes. You
create an entire picture or movie in your mind, and in that picture you are the
director, you are the producer, you are the main actor or actress. Everyone else
is a secondary actor or actress. It is your movie.
The way you see that movie is according to the agreements you have made
with life. Your point of view is something personal to you. It is no one’s truth
but yours. Then, if you get mad at me, I know you are dealing with yourself. I
am the excuse for you to get mad. And you get mad because you are afraid,
because you are dealing with fear. If you are not afraid, there is no way you
will get mad at me. If you are not afraid, there is no way you will hate me. If
you are not afraid, there is no way you will be jealous or sad.

If you live without fear, if you love, there is no place for any of those
emotions. If you don’t feel any of those emotions, it is logical that you will feel
good. When you feel good, everything around you is good. When everything
around you is great, everything makes you happy. You are loving everything that
is around you, because you are loving yourself. Because you like the way you
are. Because you are content with you. Because you are happy with your life.
You are happy with the movie that you are producing, happy with your
agreements with life. You are at peace, and you are happy. You live in that state
of bliss where everything is so wonderful, and everything is so beautiful. In that
state of bliss you are making love all the time with everything that you perceive.

Whatever people do, feel, think, or say, don’t take it personally. If they tell
you how wonderful you are, they are not saying that because of you. You know
you are wonderful. It is not necessary to believe other people who tell you that
you are wonderful. Don’t take anything personally. Even if someone got a gun
and shot you in the head, it was nothing personal. Even at that extreme.
Even the opinions you have about yourself are not necessarily true; therefore,
you don’t need to take whatever you hear in your own mind personally. The
mind has the ability to talk to itself, but it also has the ability to hear
information that is available from other realms. Sometimes you hear a voice in
your mind, and you may wonder where it came from. This voice may have
come from another reality in which there are living beings very similar to the
human mind. The Toltecs called these beings Allies. In Europe, Africa, and
India they called them the Gods.
Our mind also exists in the level of the Gods. Our mind also lives in that
reality and can perceive that reality. The mind sees with the eyes and perceives
this waking reality. But the mind also sees and perceives without the eyes,
although the reason is hardly aware of this perception. The mind lives in more
than one dimension. There may be times when you have ideas that don’t
originate in your mind, but you are perceiving them with your mind. You have
the right to believe or not believe these voices and the right not to take what
they say personally. We have a choice whether or not to believe the voices we
hear within our own minds, just as we have a choice of what to believe and
agree with in the dream of the planet.
The mind can also talk and listen to itself. The mind is divided as your body
is divided. Just as you can say, “I have one hand, and I can shake my other hand

and feel the other hand,” the mind can talk to itself. Part of the mind is speaking,
and the other part is listening. It is a big problem when a thousand parts of your
mind are all speaking at the same time. This is called a mitote, remember?
The mitote can be compared to a huge marketplace where thousands of
people are talking and bartering at the same time. Each one has different
thoughts and feelings; each one has a different point of view. The programming
in the mind — all of those agreements we have made — are not necessarily
compatible with each other. Every agreement is like a separate living being; it
has its own personality and its own voice. There are conflicting agreements that
go against other agreements and on and on until it becomes a big war in the
mind. The mitote is the reason humans hardly know what they want, how they
want it, or when they want it. They don’t agree with themselves because there
are parts of the mind that want one thing, and other parts that want exactly the
opposite.
Some part of the mind has objections to certain thoughts and actions, and
another part supports the actions of the opposing thoughts. All these little living
beings create inner conflict because they are alive and they each have a voice.
Only by making an inventory of our agreements will we uncover all of the
conflicts in the mind and eventually make order out of the chaos of the mitote.

Don’t take anything personally because by taking things personally you set
yourself up to suffer for nothing. Humans are addicted to suffering at different
levels and to different degrees, and we support each other in maintaining these
addictions. Humans agree to help each other suffer. If you have the need to be
abused, you will find it easy to be abused by others. Likewise, if you are with
people who need to suffer, something in you makes you abuse them. It is as if
they have a note on their back that says, “Please kick me.” They are asking for
justification for their suffering. Their addiction to suffering is nothing but an
agreement that is reinforced every day.
Wherever you go you will find people lying to you, and as your awareness
grows, you will notice that you also lie to yourself. Do not expect people to tell
you the truth because they also lie to themselves. You have to trust yourself and
choose to believe or not to believe what someone says to you.
When we really see other people as they are without taking it personally, we
can never be hurt by what they say or do. Even if others lie to you, it is okay.
They are lying to you because they are afraid. They are afraid you will discover

that they are not perfect. It is painful to take that social mask off. If others say
one thing, but do another, you are lying to yourself if you don’t listen to their
actions. But if you are truthful with yourself, you will save yourself a lot of
emotional pain. Telling yourself the truth about it may hurt, but you don’t need
to be attached to the pain. Healing is on the way, and it’s just a matter of time
before things will be better for you.
If someone is not treating you with love and respect, it is a gift if they walk
away from you. If that person doesn’t walk away, you will surely endure many
years of suffering with him or her. Walking away may hurt for a while, but your
heart will eventually heal. Then you can choose what you really want. You will
find that you don’t need to trust others as much as you need to trust yourself to
make the right choices.
When you make it a strong habit not to take anything personally, you avoid
many upsets in your life. Your anger, jealousy, and envy will disappear, and
even your sadness will simply disappear if you don’t take things personally.
If you can make this second agreement a habit, you will find that nothing can
put you back into hell. There is a huge amount of freedom that comes to you
when you take nothing personally. You become immune to black magicians, and
no spell can affect you regardless of how strong it may be. The whole world
can gossip about you, and if you don’t take it personally you are immune.
Someone can intentionally send emotional poison, and if you don’t take it
personally, you will not eat it. When you don’t take the emotional poison, it
becomes even worse in the sender, but not in you.
You can see how important this agreement is. Taking nothing personally
helps you to break many habits and routines that trap you in the dream of hell
and cause needless suffering. Just by practicing this second agreement you
begin to break dozens of teeny, tiny agreements that cause you to suffer. And if
you practice the first two agreements, you will break seventy-five percent of the
teeny, tiny agreements that keep you trapped in hell.
Write this agreement on paper, and put it on your refrigerator to remind you
all the time: Don’t take anything personally.
As you make a habit of not taking anything personally, you won’t need to
place your trust in what others do or say. You will only need to trust yourself to
make responsible choices. You are never responsible for the actions of others;
you are only responsible for you. When you truly understand this, and refuse to
take things personally, you can hardly be hurt by the careless comments or
actions of others.

If you keep this agreement, you can travel around the world with your heart
completely open and no one can hurt you. You can say, “I love you,” without
fear of being ridiculed or rejected. You can ask for what you need. You can say
yes, or you can say no — whatever you choose — without guilt or selfjudgment. You can choose to follow your heart always. Then you can be in the
middle of hell and still experience inner peace and happiness. You can stay in
your state of bliss, and hell will not affect you at all.

4
THE THIRD AGREEMENT

Don’t Make Assumptions
THE THIRD AGREEMENT IS DON’T MAKE ASSUMPTIONS.
We have the tendency to make assumptions about everything. The problem
with making assumptions is that we believe they are the truth. We could swear
they are real. We make assumptions about what others are doing or thinking —
we take it personally — then we blame them and react by sending emotional
poison with our word. That is why whenever we make assumptions, we’re
asking for problems. We make an assumption, we misunderstand, we take it
personally, and we end up creating a whole big drama for nothing.
All the sadness and drama you have lived in your life was rooted in making
assumptions and taking things personally. Take a moment to consider the truth
of this statement. The whole war of control between humans is about making
assumptions and taking things personally. Our whole dream of hell is based on
that.
We create a lot of emotional poison just by making assumptions and taking it
personally, because usually we start gossiping about our assumptions.
Remember, gossiping is the way we communicate to each other in the dream of
hell and transfer poison to one another. Because we are afraid to ask for
clarification, we make assumptions, and believe we are right about the
assumptions; then we defend our assumptions and try to make someone else
wrong. It is always better to ask questions than to make an assumption, because
assumptions set us up for suffering.
The big mitote in the human mind creates a lot of chaos which causes us to
misinterpret everything and misunderstand everything. We only see what we
want to see, and hear what we want to hear. We don’t perceive things the way
they are. We have the habit of dreaming with no basis in reality. We literally
dream things up in our imaginations. Because we don’t understand something,
we make an assumption about the meaning, and when the truth comes out, the
bubble of our dream pops and we find out it was not what we thought it was at
all.
An example: You are walking in the mall, and you see a person you like.
That person turns to you and smiles, and then walks away. You can make a lot
of assumptions just because of this one experience. With these assumptions you
can create a whole fantasy. And you really want to believe this fantasy and
make it real. A whole dream begins to form just from your assumptions, and

you can believe, “Oh, this person really likes me.” In your mind a whole
relationship begins from that. Maybe you even get married in this fantasyland.
But the fantasy is in your mind, in your personal dream.
Making assumptions in our relationships is really asking for problems. Often
we make the assumption that our partners know what we think and that we don’t
have to say what we want. We assume they are going to do what we want,
because they know us so well. If they don’t do what we assume they should do,
we feel so hurt and say, “You should have known.”
Another example: You decide to get married, and you make the assumption
that your partner sees marriage the same way that you do. Then you live
together and you find out this is not true. This creates a lot of conflict, but you
still don’t try to clarify your feelings about marriage. The husband comes home
from work and the wife is mad, and the husband doesn’t know why. Maybe it’s
because the wife made an assumption. Without telling him what she wants, she
makes an assumption that he knows her so well, that he knows what she wants,
as if he can read her mind. She gets so upset because he fails to meet her
expectations. Making assumptions in relationships leads to a lot of fights, a lot
of difficulties, a lot of misunderstandings with people we supposedly love.
In any kind of relationship we can make the assumption that others know
what we think, and we don’t have to say what we want. They are going to do
what we want because they know us so well. If they don’t do what we want,
what we assume they should do, we feel hurt and think, “How could you do
that? You should know.” Again, we make the assumption that the other person
knows what we want. A whole drama is created because we make this
assumption and then put more assumptions on top of it.
It is very interesting how the human mind works. We have the need to justify
everything, to explain and understand everything, in order to feel safe. We have
millions of questions that need answers because there are so many things that
the reasoning mind cannot explain. It is not important if the answer is correct;
just the answer itself makes us feel safe. This is why we make assumptions.
If others tell us something, we make assumptions, and if they don’t tell us
something we make assumptions to fulfill our need to know and to replace the
need to communicate. Even if we hear something and we don’t understand, we
make assumptions about what it means and then believe the assumptions. We
make all sorts of assumptions because we don’t have the courage to ask
questions.
These assumptions are made so fast and unconsciously most of the time

because we have agreements to communicate this way. We have agreed that it
is not safe to ask questions; we have agreed that if people love us, they should
know what we want or how we feel. When we believe something, we assume
we are right about it to the point that we will destroy relationships in order to
defend our position.
We make the assumption that everyone sees life the way we do. We assume
that others think the way we think, feel the way we feel, judge the way we
judge, and abuse the way we abuse. This is the biggest assumption that humans
make. And this is why we have a fear of being ourselves around others.
Because we think everyone else will judge us, victimize us, abuse us, and
blame us as we do ourselves. So even before others have a chance to reject us,
we have already rejected ourselves. That is the way the human mind works.
We also make assumptions about ourselves, and this creates a lot of inner
conflict. “I think I am able to do this.” You make this assumption, for instance,
then you discover you aren’t able to do it. You overestimate or underestimate
yourself because you haven’t taken the time to ask yourself questions and to
answer them. Perhaps you need to gather more facts about a particular situation.
Or maybe you need to stop lying to yourself about what you truly want.
Often when you go into a relationship with someone you like, you have to
justify why you like that person. You only see what you want to see and you
deny there are things you don’t like about that person. You lie to yourself just to
make yourself right. Then you make assumptions, and one of the assumptions is
“My love will change this person.” But this is not true. Your love will not
change anybody. If others change, it’s because they want to change, not because
you can change them. Then something happens between the two of you, and you
get hurt. Suddenly you see what you didn’t want to see before, only now it is
amplified by your emotional poison. Now you have to justify your emotional
pain and blame them for your choices.
We don’t need to justify love; it is there or not there. Real love is accepting
other people the way they are without trying to change them. If we try to change
them, this means we don’t really like them. Of course, if you decide to live with
someone, if you make that agreement, it is always better to make that agreement
with someone who is exactly the way you want him or her to be. Find someone
whom you don’t have to change at all. It is much easier to find someone who is
already the way you want him or her to be, instead of trying to change that
person. Also, that person must love you just the way you are, so he or she
doesn’t have to change you at all. If others feel they have to change you, that

means they really don’t love you just the way you are. So why be with someone
if you’re not the way he or she wants you to be?
We have to be what we are, so we don’t have to present a false image. If you
love me the way I am, “Okay, take me.” If you don’t love me the way I am,
“Okay, bye-bye. Find someone else.” It may sound harsh, but this kind of
communication means the personal agreements we make with others are clear
and impeccable.
Just imagine the day that you stop making assumptions with your partner and
eventually with everyone else in your life. Your way of communicating will
change completely, and your relationships will no longer suffer from conflicts
created by mistaken assumptions.
The way to keep yourself from making assumptions is to ask questions. Make
sure the communication is clear. If you don’t understand, ask. Have the courage
to ask questions until you are clear as you can be, and even then do not assume
you know all there is to know about a given situation. Once you hear the
answer, you will not have to make assumptions because you will know the
truth.
Also, find your voice to ask for what you want. Everybody has the right to
tell you no or yes, but you always have the right to ask. Likewise, everybody
has the right to ask you, and you have the right to say yes or no.
If you don’t understand something, it is better for you to ask and be clear,
instead of making an assumption. The day you stop making assumptions you
will communicate cleanly and clearly, free of emotional poison. Without
making assumptions your word becomes impeccable.
With clear communication, all of your relationships will change, not only
with your partner, but with everyone else. You won’t need to make assumptions
because everything becomes so clear. This is what I want; this is what you
want. If we communicate in this way, our word becomes impeccable. If all
humans could communicate in this way, with impeccability of the word, there
would be no wars, no violence, no misunderstandings. All human problems
would be resolved if we could just have good, clear communication.
This, then, is the Third Agreement: Don’t make assumptions. Just saying this
sounds easy, but I understand that it is difficult to do. It is difficult because we
so often do exactly the opposite. We have all these habits and routines that we
are not even aware of. Becoming aware of these habits and understanding the
importance of this agreement is the first step. But understanding its importance
is not enough. Information or an idea is merely the seed in your mind. What will

really make the difference is action. Taking the action over and over again
strengthens your will, nurtures the seed, and establishes a solid foundation for
the new habit to grow. After many repetitions these new agreements will
become second nature, and you will see how the magic of your word transforms
you from a black magician into a white magician.
A white magician uses the word for creation, giving, sharing, and loving. By
making this one agreement a habit, your whole life will be completely
transformed.
When you transform your whole dream, magic just happens in your life. What
you need comes to you easily because spirit moves freely through you. This is
the mastery of intent, the mastery of the spirit, the mastery of love, the mastery
of gratitude, and the mastery of life. This is the goal of the Toltec. This is the
path to personal freedom.

5
THE FOURTH AGREEMENT

Always Do Your Best
THERE IS JUST ONE MORE AGREEMENT, BUT IT’S THE one that allows
the other three to become deeply ingrained habits. The fourth agreement is
about the action of the first three: Always do your best.
Under any circumstance, always do your best, no more and no less. But keep
in mind that your best is never going to be the same from one moment to the
next. Everything is alive and changing all the time, so your best will sometimes
be high quality, and other times it will not be as good. When you wake up
refreshed and energized in the morning, your best will be better than when you
are tired at night. Your best will be different when you are healthy as opposed
to sick, or sober as opposed to drunk. Your best will depend on whether you
are feeling wonderful and happy, or upset, angry, or jealous.
In your everyday moods your best can change from one moment to another,
from one hour to the next, from one day to another. Your best will also change
over time. As you build the habit of the four new agreements, your best will
become better than it used to be.
Regardless of the quality, keep doing your best — no more and no less than
your best. If you try too hard to do more than your best, you will spend more
energy than is needed and in the end your best will not be enough. When you
overdo, you deplete your body and go against yourself, and it will take you
longer to accomplish your goal. But if you do less than your best, you subject
yourself to frustrations, self-judgment, guilt, and regrets.
Just do your best — in any circumstance in your life. It doesn’t matter if you
are sick or tired, if you always do your best there is no way you can judge
yourself. And if you don’t judge yourself there is no way you are going to suffer
from guilt, blame, and self-punishment. By always doing your best, you will
break a big spell that you have been under.
There was a man who wanted to transcend his suffering so he went to a
Buddhist temple to find a Master to help him. He went to the Master and asked,
“Master, if I meditate four hours a day, how long will it take me to transcend?”
The Master looked at him and said, “If you meditate four hours a day,
perhaps you will transcend in ten years.”
Thinking he could do better, the man then said, “Oh, Master, what if I
meditated eight hours a day, how long will it take me to transcend?”
The Master looked at him and said, “If you meditate eight hours a day,

perhaps you will transcend in twenty years.”
“But why will it take me longer if I meditate more?” the man asked.
The Master replied, “You are not here to sacrifice your joy or your life. You
are here to live, to be happy, and to love. If you can do your best in two hours
of meditation, but you spend eight hours instead, you will only grow tired, miss
the point, and you won’t enjoy your life. Do your best, and perhaps you will
learn that no matter how long you meditate, you can live, love, and be happy.”

Doing your best, you are going to live your life intensely. You are going to be
productive, you are going to be good to yourself, because you will be giving
yourself to your family, to your community, to everything. But it is the action
that is going to make you feel intensely happy. When you always do your best,
you take action. Doing your best is taking the action because you love it, not
because you’re expecting a reward. Most people do exactly the opposite: They
only take action when they expect a reward, and they don’t enjoy the action.
And that’s the reason why they don’t do their best.
For example, most people go to work every day just thinking of payday, and
the money they will get from the work they are doing. They can hardly wait for
Friday or Saturday, whatever day they receive their money and can take time
off. They are working for the reward, and as a result they resist work. They try
to avoid the action and it becomes more difficult, and they don’t do their best.
They work so hard all week long, suffering the work, suffering the action, not
because they like to, but because they feel they have to. They have to work
because they have to pay the rent, because they have to support their family.
They have all that frustration, and when they do receive their money they are
unhappy. They have two days to rest, to do what they want to do, and what do
they do? They try to escape. They get drunk because they don’t like themselves.
They don’t like their life. There are many ways that we hurt ourselves when we
don’t like who we are.
On the other hand, if you take action just for the sake of doing it, without
expecting a reward, you will find that you enjoy every action you do. Rewards
will come, but you are not attached to the reward. You can even get more than
you would have imagined for yourself without expecting a reward. If we like
what we do, if we always do our best, then we are really enjoying life. We are
having fun, we don’t get bored, we don’t have frustrations.
When you do your best, you don’t give the Judge the opportunity to find you

guilty or to blame you. If you have done your best and the Judge tries to judge
you according to your Book of Laws, you’ve got the answer: “I did my best.”
There are no regrets. That is why we always do our best. It is not an easy
agreement to keep, but this agreement is really going to set you free.
When you do your best you learn to accept yourself. But you have to be
aware and learn from your mistakes. Learning from your mistakes means you
practice, look honestly at the results, and keep practicing. This increases your
awareness.
Doing your best really doesn’t feel like work because you enjoy whatever
you are doing. You know you’re doing your best when you are enjoying the
action or doing it in a way that will not have negative repercussions for you.
You do your best because you want to do it, not because you have to do it, not
because you are trying to please the Judge, and not because you are trying to
please other people.
If you take action because you have to, then there is no way you are going to
do your best. Then it is better not to do it. No, you do your best because doing
your best all the time makes you so happy. When you are doing your best just
for the pleasure of doing it, you are taking action because you enjoy the action.
Action is about living fully. Inaction is the way that we deny life. Inaction is
sitting in front of the television every day for years because you are afraid to be
alive and to take the risk of expressing what you are. Expressing what you are
is taking action. You can have many great ideas in your head, but what makes
the difference is the action. Without action upon an idea, there will be no
manifestation, no results, and no reward.
A good example of this comes from the story about Forrest Gump. He didn’t
have great ideas, but he took action. He was happy because he always did his
best at whatever he did. He was richly rewarded without expecting any reward
at all. Taking action is being alive. It’s taking the risk to go out and express
your dream. This is different than imposing your dream on someone else,
because everyone has the right to express his or her dream.
Doing your best is a great habit to have. I do my best in everything I do and
feel. Doing my best has become a ritual in my life because I made the choice to
make it a ritual. It’s a belief like any other belief that I choose. I make
everything a ritual, and I always do my best. Taking a shower is a ritual for me,
and with that action I tell my body how much I love it. I feel and enjoy the
water on my body. I do my best to fulfill the needs of my body. I do my best to
give to my body and to receive what my body gives to me.

In India they perform a ritual called puja. In this ritual, they take idols that
represent God in many different forms and bathe them, feed them, and give their
love to them. They even chant mantras to these idols. The idol itself is not
important. What is important is the way they perform the ritual, the way they
say, “I love you, God.”
God is life. God is life in action. The best way to say, “I love you, God,” is
to live your life doing your best. The best way to say, “Thank you, God,” is by
letting go of the past and living in the present moment, right here and now.
Whatever life takes away from you, let it go. When you surrender and let go of
the past, you allow yourself to be fully alive in the moment. Letting go of the
past means you can enjoy the dream that is happening right now.
If you live in a past dream, you don’t enjoy what is happening right now
because you will always wish it to be different than it is. There is no time to
miss anyone or anything because you are alive. Not enjoying what is happening
right now is living in the past and being only half alive. This leads to self-pity,
suffering, and tears.
You were born with the right to be happy. You were born with the right to
love, to enjoy and to share your love. You are alive, so take your life and enjoy
it. Don’t resist life passing through you, because that is God passing through
you. Just your existence proves the existence of God. Your existence proves the
existence of life and energy.
We don’t need to know or prove anything. Just to be, to take a risk and enjoy
your life, is all that matters. Say no when you want to say no, and yes when you
want to say yes. You have the right to be you. You can only be you when you do
your best. When you don’t do your best you are denying yourself the right to be
you. That’s a seed that you should really nurture in your mind. You don’t need
knowledge or great philosophical concepts. You don’t need the acceptance of
others. You express your own divinity by being alive and by loving yourself
and others. It is an expression of God to say, “Hey, I love you.”
The first three agreements will only work if you do your best. Don’t expect
that you will always be able to be impeccable with your word. Your routine
habits are too strong and firmly rooted in your mind. But you can do your best.
Don’t expect that you will never take anything personally; just do your best.
Don’t expect that you will never make another assumption, but you can certainly
do your best.
By doing your best, the habits of misusing your word, taking things
personally, and making assumptions will become weaker and less frequent with

time. You don’t need to judge yourself, feel guilty, or punish yourself if you
cannot keep these agreements. If you’re doing your best, you will feel good
about yourself even if you still make assumptions, still take things personally,
and still are not impeccable with your word.
If you do your best always, over and over again, you will become a master of
transformation. Practice makes the master. By doing your best you become a
master. Everything you have ever learned, you learned through repetition. You
learned to write, to drive, and even to walk by repetition. You are a master of
speaking your language because you practiced. Action is what makes the
difference.
If you do your best in the search for personal freedom, in the search for selflove, you will discover that it’s just a matter of time before you find what you
are looking for. It’s not about daydreaming or sitting for hours dreaming in
meditation. You have to stand up and be a human. You have to honor the man or
woman that you are. Respect your body, enjoy your body, love your body, feed,
clean, and heal your body. Exercise and do what makes your body feel good.
This is a puja to your body, and that is a communion between you and God.
You don’t need to worship idols of the Virgin Mary, the Christ, or the
Buddha. You can if you want to; if it feels good, do it. Your own body is a
manifestation of God, and if you honor your body everything will change for
you. When you practice giving love to every part of your body, you plant seeds
of love in your mind, and when they grow, you will love, honor, and respect
your body immensely.
Every action then becomes a ritual in which you are honoring God. After
that, the next step is honoring God with every thought, every emotion, every
belief, even what is “right” or “wrong.” Every thought becomes a communion
with God, and you will live a dream without judgments, victimization, and free
of the need to gossip and abuse yourself.

When you honor these four agreements together, there is no way that you will
live in hell. There is no way. If you are impeccable with your word, if you
don’t take anything personally, if you don’t make assumptions, if you always do
your best, then you are going to have a beautiful life. You are going to control
your life one hundred percent.
The Four Agreements are a summary of the mastery of transformation, one of
the masteries of the Toltec. You transform hell into heaven. The dream of the

planet is transformed into your personal dream of heaven. The knowledge is
there; it’s just waiting for you to use it. The Four Agreements are there; you just
need to adopt these agreements and respect their meaning and power.
Just do your best to honor these agreements. You can make this agreement
today: I choose to honor The Four Agreements. It’s so simple and logical that
even a child can understand them. But, you must have a very strong will, a very
strong will to keep these agreements. Why? Because wherever we go we find
that our path is full of obstacles. Everyone tries to sabotage our commitment to
these new agreements, and everything around us is a setup for us to break them.
The problem is all the other agreements that are a part of the dream of the
planet. They are alive, and they are very strong.
That’s why you need to be a great hunter, a great warrior, who can defend
these Four Agreements with your life. Your happiness, your freedom, your
entire way of living depends on it. The warrior’s goal is to transcend this
world, to escape from this hell, and never come back. As the Toltecs teach us,
the reward is to transcend the human experience of suffering, to become the
embodiment of God. That is the reward.
We really need to use every bit of power we have to succeed in keeping
these agreements. I didn’t expect that I could do it at first. I have fallen many
times, but I stood up and kept going. And I fell again, and I kept going. I didn’t
feel sorry for myself. There was no way that I felt sorry for myself. I said, “If I
fall, I am strong enough, I’m intelligent enough, I can do it!” I stood up and kept
going. I fell and I kept going and going, and each time it became easier and
easier. Yet, in the beginning it was so hard, so difficult.
So if you fall, do not judge. Do not give your Judge the satisfaction of turning
you into a victim. No, be tough with yourself. Stand up and make the agreement
again. “Okay, I broke my agreement to be impeccable with my word. I will start
all over again. I am going to keep The Four Agreements just for today. Today I
will be impeccable with my word, I will not take anything personally, I will not
make any assumptions, and I am going to do my best.”
If you break an agreement, begin again tomorrow, and again the next day. It
will be difficult at first, but each day will become easier and easier, until
someday you will discover that you are ruling your life with these Four
Agreements. And, you will be surprised at the way your life has been
transformed.
You don’t need to be religious or go to church every day. Your love and selfrespect are growing and growing. You can do it. If I did it, you can do it also.

Do not be concerned about the future; keep your attention on today, and stay in
the present moment. Just live one day at a time. Always do your best to keep
these agreements, and soon it will be easy for you. Today is the beginning of a
new dream.

6
THE TOLTEC PATH TO FREEDOM

Breaking Old Agreements
EVERYONE TALKS ABOUT FREEDOM . ALL AROUND the world different
people, different races, different countries are fighting for freedom. But what is
freedom? In America we speak of living in a free country. But are we really
free? Are we free to be who we really are? The answer is no, we are not free.
True freedom has to do with the human spirit — it is the freedom to be who we
really are.
Who stops us from being free? We blame the government, we blame the
weather, we blame our parents, we blame religion, we blame God. Who really
stops us from being free? We stop ourselves. What does it really mean to be
free? Sometimes we get married and we say that we lose our freedom, then we
get divorced and we are still not free. What stops us? Why can’t we be
ourselves?
We have memories of long ago, when we used to be free and we loved being
free, but we have forgotten what freedom really means.
If we see a child who is two or three, perhaps four years old, we find a free
human. Why is this human free? Because this human does whatever he or she
wants to do. The human is completely wild. Just like a flower, a tree, or an
animal that has not been domesticated — wild! And if we observe humans who
are two years old, we find that most of the time these humans have a big smile
on their face and they’re having fun. They are exploring the world. They are not
afraid to play. They are afraid when they are hurt, when they are hungry, when
some of their needs are not met, but they don’t worry about the past, don’t care
about the future, and only live in the present moment.
Very young children are not afraid to express what they feel. They are so
loving that if they perceive love, they melt into love. They are not afraid to love
at all. That is the description of a normal human being. As children we are not
afraid of the future or ashamed of the past. Our normal human tendency is to
enjoy life, to play, to explore, to be happy, and to love.
But, what has happened with the adult human? Why are we so different? Why
are we not wild? From the point of view of the Victim we can say that
something sad happened to us, and from the point of view of the warrior we can
say that what happened to us is normal. What has happened is that we have the
Book of Law, the big Judge and the Victim who rule our lives. We are no
longer free because the Judge, the Victim, and the belief system don’t allow us

to be who we really are. Once our minds have been programmed with all that
garbage, we are no longer happy.
This chain of training from human to human, from generation to generation, is
perfectly normal in human society. You don’t need to blame your parents for
teaching you to be like them. What else could they teach you but what they
know? They did the best they could, and if they abused you, it was due to their
own domestication, their own fears, their own beliefs. They had no control
over the programming they received, so they couldn’t have behaved any
differently.
There is no need to blame your parents or anyone who abused you in your
life, including yourself. But it is time to stop the abuse. It is time to free
yourself of the tyranny of the Judge by changing the foundation of your own
agreements. It is time to be free from the role of the Victim.
The real you is still a little child who never grew up. Sometimes that little
child comes out when you are having fun or playing, when you feel happy, when
you are painting, or writing poetry, or playing the piano, or expressing yourself
in some way. These are the happiest moments of your life — when the real you
comes out, when you don’t care about the past and you don’t worry about the
future. You are childlike.
But there is something that changes all that: We call them responsibilities.
The Judge says, “Wait a second, you are responsible, you have things to do, you
have to work, you have to go to school, you have to earn a living.” All these
responsibilities come to mind. Our face changes and becomes serious again. If
you watch children when they are playing adults, you will see their little faces
change. “Let’s pretend I’m a lawyer,” and right away their faces change; the
adult face takes over. We go to court and that is the face we see — and that is
what we are. We are still children, but we have lost our freedom.
The freedom we are looking for is the freedom to be ourselves, to express
ourselves. But if we look at our lives we will see that most of the time we do
things just to please others, just to be accepted by others, rather than living our
lives to please ourselves. That is what has happened to our freedom. And we
see in our society and all the societies around the world, that for every thousand
people, nine hundred and ninety-nine are completely domesticated.
The worst part is that most of us are not even aware that we are not free.
There is something inside that whispers to us that we are not free, but we do not
understand what it is, and why we are not free.
The problem with most people is that they live their lives and never discover

that the Judge and the Victim rule their mind, and therefore they don’t have a
chance to be free. The first step toward personal freedom is awareness. We
need to be aware that we are not free in order to be free. We need to be aware
of what the problem is in order to solve the problem.
Awareness is always the first step because if you are not aware, there is
nothing you can change. If you are not aware that your mind is full of wounds
and emotional poison, you cannot begin to clean and heal the wounds and you
will continue to suffer.
There is no reason to suffer. With awareness you can rebel and say, “This is
enough!” You can look for a way to heal and transform your personal dream.
The dream of the planet is just a dream. It is not even real. If you go into the
dream and start challenging your beliefs, you will find that most of the beliefs
that guided you into the wounded mind are not even true. You will find that you
suffered all those years of drama for nothing. Why? Because the belief system
that was put inside your mind is based on lies.
That is why it is important for you to master your own dream; that is why the
Toltecs became dream masters. Your life is the manifestation of your dream; it
is an art. And you can change your life anytime if you aren’t enjoying the dream.
Dream masters create a masterpiece of life; they control the dream by making
choices. Everything has consequences and a dream master is aware of the
consequences.
To be Toltec is a way of life. It is a way of life where there are no leaders
and no followers, where you have your own truth and live your own truth. A
Toltec becomes wise, becomes wild, and becomes free again.
There are three masteries that lead people to become Toltecs. First is the
Mastery of Awareness. This is to be aware of who we really are, with all the
possibilities. The second is the Mastery of Transformation — how to change,
how to be free of domestication. The third is the Mastery of Intent. Intent from
the Toltec point of view is that part of life that makes transformation of energy
possible; it is the one living being that seamlessly encompasses all energy, or
what we call “God.” Intent is life itself; it is unconditional love. The Mastery
of Intent is therefore the Mastery of Love.
When we talk about the Toltec path to freedom, we find that they have an
entire map for breaking free of domestication. They compare the Judge, the
Victim, and the belief system to a parasite that invades the human mind. From
the Toltec point of view, all humans who are domesticated are sick. They are
sick because there is a parasite that controls the mind and controls the brain.

The food for the parasite is the negative emotions that come from fear.
If we look at the description of a parasite, we find that a parasite is a living
being who lives off of other living beings, sucking their energy without any
useful contribution in return, and hurting their host little by little. The Judge, the
Victim, and the belief system fit this description very well. Together they
comprise a living being made of psychic or emotional energy, and that energy is
alive. Of course it is not material energy, but neither are emotions material
energy. Our dreams are not material energy either, but we know they exist.
One function of the brain is to transform material energy into emotional
energy. Our brain is the factory of the emotions. And we have said that the main
function of the mind is to dream. The Toltecs believe that the parasite — the
Judge, the Victim, and the belief system — has control of your mind; it controls
your personal dream. The parasite dreams through your mind and lives its life
through your body. It survives on the emotions that come from fear, and thrives
on drama and suffering.
The freedom we seek is to use our own mind and body, to live our own life,
instead of the life of the belief system. When we discover that the mind is
controlled by the Judge and the Victim and the real “us” is in the corner, we
have just two choices. One choice is to keep living the way we are, to
surrender to the Judge and the Victim, to keep living in the dream of the planet.
The second choice is to do what we do as children when parents try to
domesticate us. We can rebel and say “No!” We can declare a war against the
parasite, a war against the Judge and the Victim, a war for our independence, a
war for the right to use our own mind and our own brain.
That is why in all the shamanic traditions in America, from Canada to
Argentina, people call themselves warriors, because they are in a war against
the parasite in the mind. That is the real meaning of a warrior. The warrior is
one who rebels against the invasion of the parasite. The warrior rebels and
declares a war. But to be a warrior doesn’t mean we always win the war; we
may win or we may lose, but we always do our best and at least we have a
chance to be free again. Choosing this path gives us, at the very least, the
dignity of rebellion, and ensures that we will not be the helpless victim of our
own whimsical emotions or the poisonous emotions of others. Even if we
succumb to the enemy — the parasite — we will not be among those victims
who would not fight back.
At best, being a warrior gives us an opportunity to transcend the dream of the
planet, and to change our personal dream to a dream that we call heaven. Just

like hell, heaven is a place that exists within our mind. It is a place of joy, a
place where we are happy, where we are free to love and to be who we really
are. We can reach heaven while we are alive; we don’t have to wait until we
die. God is always present and the kingdom of heaven is everywhere, but first
we need to have the eyes and ears to see and hear that truth. We need to be free
of the parasite.
The parasite can be compared to a monster with a thousand heads. Every
head of the parasite is one of the fears that we have. If we want to be free, we
have to destroy the parasite. One solution is to attack the parasite head by head,
which means we face each of our fears, one by one. This is a slow process, but
it works. Every time we face one of the fears we are a little more free.
A second approach is to stop feeding the parasite. If we don’t give the
parasite any food, we kill the parasite by starvation. To do this we have to gain
control of our emotions, we have to refrain from fueling the emotions that come
from fear. This is easy to say, but it is very difficult to do. It is difficult because
the Judge and the Victim control our mind.
A third solution is called the initiation of the dead. The initiation of the dead
is found in many traditions and esoteric schools around the world. We find it in
Egypt, India, Greece, and America. This is a symbolic death which kills the
parasite without harming our physical body. When we “die” symbolically the
parasite has to die. This is faster than the first two solutions, but it is even more
difficult to do. We need a great deal of courage to face the angel of death. We
need to be very strong.
Let’s take a closer look at each of these solutions.
THE ART OF TRANSFORMATION:
THE DREAM OF THE SECOND ATTENTION
We have learned that the dream you are living now is the result of the outside
dream hooking your attention and feeding you all of your beliefs. The process
of domestication can be called the dream of the first attention because it was
how your attention was used for the first time to create the first dream of your
life.
One way to change your beliefs is to focus your attention on all those
agreements and beliefs, and change the agreements with yourself. In doing this
you are using your attention for the second time, thus creating the dream of the
second attention or the new dream.

The difference is that you are no longer innocent. When you were a child this
was not true; you didn’t have a choice. But you are no longer a child. Now it’s
up to you to choose what to believe and what not to believe. You can choose to
believe in anything, and that includes believing in yourself.
The first step is to become aware of the fog that is in your mind. You must
become aware that you are dreaming all the time. Only with awareness do you
have the possibility of transforming your dream. If you have the awareness that
the whole drama of your life is the result of what you believe, and what you
believe is not real, then you can begin to change it. However, to really change
your beliefs you need to focus your attention on what it is that you want to
change. You have to know which agreements you want to change before you can
change them.
So the next step is to develop awareness of all the self-limiting, fear-based
beliefs that make you unhappy. You take an inventory of all that you believe, all
your agreements, and through this process you begin the transformation. The
Toltecs called this the Art of Transformation, and it’s a whole mastery. You
achieve the Mastery of Transformation by changing the fear-based agreements
that make you suffer, and reprogramming your own mind, in your own way. One
of the ways to do this is to explore and adopt alternative beliefs such as the
Four Agreements.
The decision to adopt the Four Agreements is a declaration of war to regain
your freedom from the parasite. The Four Agreements offer the possibility of
ending the emotional pain, which can open the door for you to enjoy your life
and begin a new dream. It’s up to you to explore the possibilities of your
dream, if you are interested. The Four Agreements were created to assist you in
the Art of Transformation, to help you break the limiting agreements, gain more
personal power, and become stronger. The stronger you get, the more
agreements you can break until the moment comes when you make it to the core
of all of those agreements.
Going to the core of those agreements is what I call going into the desert.
When you go into the desert you meet your demons face-to-face. After coming
out of the desert, all those demons become angels.
Practicing the four new agreements is a big act of power. Breaking the spell
of black magic in your mind requires great personal power. Every time you
break an agreement, you gain extra power. You start by breaking agreements
that are very small and require less power. As those smaller agreements are
broken, your personal power will increase until you reach a point when you can

finally face the big demons in your mind.
For example, the little girl who was told not to sing is now twenty years old
and she still does not sing. One way she can overcome the belief that her voice
is ugly is to say, “Okay, I will try to sing, even if I do sing badly.” Then she can
pretend that someone is clapping and telling her, “Oh! That was beautiful.” This
may break the agreement a teeny, tiny bit, but it will still be there. However,
now she has a little more power and courage to try again and again until finally
she breaks the agreement.
That’s one way out of the dream of hell. But for every agreement you break
that makes you suffer, you will need to replace it with a new agreement that
makes you happy. This will keep the old agreement from coming back. If you
occupy the same space with a new agreement, then the old agreement is gone
forever and in its place is the new agreement.
There are many strong beliefs in the mind that can make this process look
hopeless. This is why you need to go step-by-step and be patient with yourself
because this is a slow process. The way you are living now is the result of
many years of domestication. You cannot expect to break the domestication in
one day. Breaking agreements is very difficult because we put the power of the
word (which is the power of our will) into every agreement we have made.
We need the same amount of power to change an agreement. We cannot
change an agreement with less power than we used to make the agreement, and
almost all our personal power is invested in keeping the agreements we have
with ourselves. That’s because our agreements are actually like a strong
addiction. We are addicted to being the way we are. We are addicted to anger,
jealousy, and self-pity. We are addicted to the beliefs that tell us, “I’m not good
enough, I’m not intelligent enough. Why even try? Other people will do it
because they’re better than me.”
All of these old agreements which rule our dream of life are the result of
repeating them over and over again. Therefore, to adopt the Four Agreements,
you need to put repetition in action. Practicing the new agreements in your life
is how your best becomes better. Repetition makes the master.
THE DISCIPLINE OF THE WARRIOR:
CONTROLLING YOUR OWN BEHAVIOR
Imagine that you awake early one morning overflowing with enthusiasm for
the day. You feel good. You are happy and have plenty of energy to face the

day. Then at breakfast, you have a big fight with your spouse, and a flood of
emotion comes out. You get mad, and in the emotion of anger you spend a lot of
personal power. After the fight, you feel drained, and you just want to go and
cry. In fact, you feel so tired that you go to your room, collapse, and try to
recover. You spend the day wrapped up in your emotions. You have no energy
to keep going, and you just want to walk away from everything.
Every day we awake with a certain amount of mental, emotional, and
physical energy that we spend throughout the day. If we allow our emotions to
deplete our energy, we have no energy to change our lives or to give to others.
The way you see the world will depend upon the emotions you are feeling.
When you are angry, everything around you is wrong, nothing is right. You
blame everything including the weather; whether it’s raining or the sun is
shining, nothing pleases you. When you are sad, everything around you is sad
and makes you cry. You see the trees and you feel sad; you see the rain and
everything looks so sad. Perhaps you feel vulnerable and have a need to protect
yourself because you don’t know in what moment someone will attack you. You
do not trust anything or anyone around you. This is because you see the world
with the eyes of fear!
Imagine that the human mind is the same as your skin. You can touch healthy
skin and it feels wonderful. Your skin is made for perception and the sensation
of touch is wonderful. Now imagine you have an injury and the skin gets cut and
infected. If you touch the infected skin, it is going to hurt, so you try to cover
and protect the skin. You will not enjoy being touched because it hurts.
Now imagine that all humans have this skin disease. Nobody can touch each
other because it is going to hurt. Everyone has wounds on their skin, so the
infection is seen as normal, the pain is also considered normal; we believe we
are supposed to be that way.
Can you imagine how we would behave with each other if all the humans in
the world had this skin disease? Of course we would hardly ever hug each
other because it would be too painful. So we would need to create a lot of
distance between us.
The human mind is exactly like this description of infected skin. Every human
has an emotional body completely covered with infected wounds. Each wound
is infected with emotional poison — the poison of all the emotions that makes
us suffer, such as hate, anger, envy, and sadness. An action of injustice opens a
wound in the mind and we react with emotional poison because of the concepts
and beliefs we have about injustice and what is fair. The mind is so wounded

and full of poison by the process of domestication, that everyone describes the
wounded mind as normal. This is considered normal, but I can tell you it is not
normal.
We have a dysfunctional dream of the planet, and humans are mentally sick
with a disease called fear. The symptoms of the disease are all the emotions
that make humans suffer: anger, hate, sadness, envy, and betrayal. When the fear
is too great, the reasoning mind begins to fail, and we call this mental illness.
Psychotic behavior occurs when the mind is so frightened and the wounds so
painful, that it seems better to break contact with the outside world.
If we can see our state of mind as a disease, we find there is a cure. We
don’t have to suffer any longer. First we need the truth to open the emotional
wounds, take the poison out, and heal the wounds completely. How do we do
this? We must forgive those we feel have wronged us, not because they deserve
to be forgiven, but because we love ourselves so much we don’t want to keep
paying for the injustice.
Forgiveness is the only way to heal. We can choose to forgive because we
feel compassion for ourselves. We can let go of the resentment and declare,
“That’s enough! I will no longer be the big Judge that goes against myself. I
will no longer beat myself up and abuse myself. I will no longer be the Victim.”
First, we need to forgive our parents, our brothers, our sisters, our friends,
and God. Once you forgive God, you can finally forgive yourself. Once you
forgive yourself, the self-rejection in your mind is over. Self-acceptance
begins, and the self-love will grow so strong that you will finally accept
yourself just the way you are. That’s the beginning of the free human.
Forgiveness is the key.
You will know you have forgiven someone when you see them and you no
longer have an emotional reaction. You will hear the name of the person and
you will have no emotional reaction. When someone can touch what used to be
a wound and it no longer hurts you, then you know you have truly forgiven.
The truth is like a scalpel. The truth is painful, because it opens all of the
wounds which are covered by lies so that we can be healed. These lies are
what we call the denial system. It’s a good thing we have the denial system,
because it allows us to cover our wounds and still function. But once we no
longer have any wounds or any poison, we don’t need to lie anymore. We don’t
need the denial system, because a healthy mind, like healthy skin, can be
touched without hurting. It’s pleasurable for the mind to be touched when it is
clean.

The problem with most people is that they lose control of their emotions. It is
the emotions that control the behavior of the human, not the human who controls
the emotions. When we lose control we say things that we don’t want to say,
and do things that we don’t want to do. That is why it is so important to be
impeccable with our word and to become a spiritual warrior. We must learn to
control the emotions so we have enough personal power to change our fearbased agreements, escape from hell, and create our own personal heaven.
How are we to become a warrior? There are certain characteristics of the
warrior that are nearly the same around the world. The warrior has awareness.
That’s very important. We are aware that we are at war, and the war in our
minds requires discipline. Not the discipline of a soldier, but the discipline of a
warrior. Not the discipline from the outside to tell us what to do and what not
to do, but the discipline to be ourselves, no matter what.
The warrior has control. Not control over another human, but control over
one’s own emotions, control over one’s own self. It is when we lose control
that we repress the emotions, not when we are in control. The big difference
between a warrior and a victim is that the victim represses, and the warrior
refrains. Victims repress because they are afraid to show the emotions, afraid
to say what they want to say. To refrain is not the same thing as repression. To
refrain is to hold the emotions and to express them in the right moment, not
before, not later. That is why warriors are impeccable. They have complete
control over their own emotions and therefore over their own behavior.
THE INITIATION OF THE DEAD:
EMBRACING THE ANGEL OF DEATH
The final way to attain personal freedom is to prepare ourselves for the
initiation of the dead, to take death itself as our teacher. What the angel of death
can teach us is how to be truly alive. We become aware that we can die at any
moment; we have just the present to be alive. The truth is that we don’t know if
we are going to die tomorrow. Who knows? We have the idea that we have
many years in the future. But do we?
If we go to the hospital and the doctor tells us that we have one week to live,
what are we going to do? As we have said before, we have two choices. One is
to suffer because we are going to die, and to tell everyone, “Poor me, I am
going to die,” and really create a huge drama. The other choice is to use every
moment to be happy, to do what we really enjoy doing. If we only have one

week to live, let’s enjoy life. Let’s be alive. We can say, “I’m going to be
myself. No longer am I going to run my life trying to please other people. No
longer am I going to be afraid of what they think about me. What do I care what
others think if I am going to die in one week? I’m going to be myself.”
The angel of death can teach us to live every day as if it is the last day of our
lives, as if there may be no tomorrow. We can begin each day by saying, “I am
awake, I see the sun. I am going to give my gratitude to the sun and to everything
and everyone, because I am still alive. One more day to be myself.”
That is the way I see life, that is what the angel of death taught me — to be
completely open, to know that there is nothing to be afraid of. And of course I
treat the people I love with love because this may be the last day that I can tell
you how much I love you. I don’t know if I am going to see you again, so I don’t
want to fight with you.
What if I had a big fight with you and I told you all those emotional poisons
that I have against you and you die tomorrow? Oops! Oh my God, the Judge
will get me so bad, and I will feel so guilty for everything that I told you. I will
even feel guilty for not telling you how much I love you. The love that makes
me happy is the love that I can share with you. Why do I need to deny that I love
you? It is not important if you love me back. I may die tomorrow or you may die
tomorrow. What makes me happy now is to let you know how much I love you.
You can live your life this way. By doing so, you prepare yourself for the
initiation of death. What is going to happen in the initiation of death is that the
old dream that you have in your mind is going to die forever. Yes, you are going
to have memories of the parasite — of the Judge, the Victim, and what you used
to believe — but the parasite will be dead.
That is what is going to die in the initiation of death — the parasite. It is not
easy to go for the initiation of death because the Judge and the Victim will fight
with everything they have. They don’t want to die. And we feel we are the ones
who are going to die, and we are afraid of this death.
When we live in the dream of the planet, it is as if we are dead. Whoever
survives the initiation of the dead receives the most wonderful gift: the
resurrection. To receive the resurrection is to arise from the dead, to be alive,
to be ourselves again. The resurrection is to be like a child — to be wild and
free, but with a difference. The difference is that we have freedom with
wisdom instead of innocence. We are able to break our domestication, become
free again, and heal our mind. We surrender to the angel of death, knowing that
the parasite will die and we will still be alive with a healthy mind and perfect

reason. Then we are free to use our own mind and run our own life.
That is what, in the Toltec way, the angel of death teaches us. The angel of
death comes to us and says, “You see everything that exists here is mine; it is
not yours. Your house, your spouse, your children, your car, your career, your
money — everything is mine and I can take it away when I want to, but for now
you can use it.”
If we surrender to the angel of death we will be happy forever and ever.
Why? Because the angel of death takes the past away in order to make it
possible for life to continue. For every moment that is past, the angel of death
keeps taking the part that is dead and we keep living in the present. The parasite
wants us to carry the past with us and that makes it so heavy to be alive. When
we try to live in the past, how can we enjoy the present? When we dream of the
future, why must we carry the burden of the past? When are we going to live in
the present? That is what the angel of death teaches us to do.

7
THE NEW DREAM

Heaven on Earth
I WANT YOU TO FORGET EVERYTHING YOU HAVE learned in your
whole life. This is the beginning of a new understanding, a new dream.
The dream you are living is your creation. It is your perception of reality that
you can change at any time. You have the power to create hell, and you have the
power to create heaven. Why not dream a different dream? Why not use your
mind, your imagination, and your emotions to dream heaven?
Just use your imagination and a tremendous thing will happen. Imagine that
you have the ability to see the world with different eyes, whenever you choose.
Each time you open your eyes, you see the world around you in a different way.
Close your eyes now, and then open them and look outside.
What you will see is love coming out of the trees, love coming out of the sky,
love coming out of the light. You will perceive love from everything around
you. This is the state of bliss. You perceive love directly from everything,
including yourself and other humans. Even when humans are sad or angry,
behind these feelings you can see that they are also sending love.
Using your imagination and your new eyes of perception, I want you to see
yourself living a new life, a new dream, a life where you don’t need to justify
your existence and you are free to be who you really are.
Imagine that you have permission to be happy and to really enjoy your life.
Your life is free of conflict with yourself and with others.
Imagine living your life without fear of expressing your dreams. You know
what you want, what you don’t want, and when you want it. You are free to
change your life the way you really want to. You are not afraid to ask for what
you need, to say yes or no to anything or anyone.
Imagine living your life without the fear of being judged by others. You no
longer rule your behavior according to what others may think about you. You
are no longer responsible for anyone’s opinion. You have no need to control
anyone, and no one controls you, either.
Imagine living your life without judging others. You can easily forgive others
and let go of any judgments that you have. You don’t have the need to be right,
and you don’t need to make anyone else wrong. You respect yourself and
everyone else, and they respect you in return.
Imagine living without the fear of loving and not being loved. You are no
longer afraid to be rejected, and you don’t have the need to be accepted. You

can say “I love you” with no shame or justification. You can walk in the world
with your heart completely open, and not be afraid to be hurt.
Imagine living your life without being afraid to take a risk and to explore
life. You are not afraid to lose anything. You are not afraid to be alive in the
world, and you are not afraid to die.
Imagine that you love yourself just the way you are. You love your body just
the way it is, and you love your emotions just the way they are. You know that
you are perfect just as you are.
The reason I ask you to imagine these things is because they are all entirely
possible! You can live in the state of grace, the state of bliss, the dream of
heaven. But in order to experience this dream, you must first understand what it
is.
Only love has the ability to put you in that state of bliss. Being in bliss is like
being in love. Being in love is like being in bliss. You are floating in the
clouds. You are perceiving love wherever you go. It is entirely possible to live
this way all the time. It is possible because others have done it and they are no
different from you. They live in bliss because they have changed their
agreements and are dreaming a different dream.
Once you feel what it means to live in a state of bliss, you will love it. You
will know that heaven on earth is truth — that heaven truly exists. Once you
know that heaven exists, once you know it is possible to stay there, it’s up to
you to make the effort to do it. Two thousand years ago, Jesus told us about the
kingdom of heaven, the kingdom of love, but hardly anyone was ready to hear
this. They said, “What are you talking about? My heart is empty, I don’t feel the
love that you are talking about; I don’t feel the peace that you have.” You don’t
have to do this. Just imagine that his message of love is possible and you will
find that it is yours.
The world is very beautiful and very wonderful. Life can be very easy when
love is your way of life. You can be loving all the time. This is your choice.
You may not have a reason to love, but you can love because to love makes you
so happy. Love in action only produces happiness. Love will give you inner
peace. It will change your perception of everything.
You can see everything with the eyes of love. You can be aware that there is
love all around you. When you live this way, there is no longer a fog in your
mind. The mitote has gone on a permanent vacation. This is what humans have
been seeking for centuries. For thousands of years we have been searching for
happiness. Happiness is the lost paradise. Humans have worked so hard to

reach this point, and this is part of the evolution of the mind. This is the future
of humanity.
This way of life is possible, and it’s in your hands. Moses called it the
Promised Land, Buddha called it Nirvana, Jesus called it Heaven, and the
Toltecs call it a New Dream. Unfortunately, your identity is mixed with the
dream of the planet. All of your beliefs and agreements are there in the fog. You
feel the presence of the parasite and believe it is you. This makes it difficult to
let go — to release the parasite and create the space to experience love. You
are attached to the Judge, attached to the Victim. Suffering makes you feel safe
because you know it so well.
But there is really no reason to suffer. The only reason you suffer is because
you choose to suffer. If you look at your life you will find many excuses to
suffer, but a good reason to suffer you will not find. The same is true for
happiness. The only reason you are happy is because you choose to be happy.
Happiness is a choice, and so is suffering.
Maybe we cannot escape from the destiny of the human, but we have a
choice: to suffer our destiny or to enjoy our destiny. To suffer, or to love and be
happy. To live in hell, or to live in heaven. My choice is to live in heaven.
What is yours?

Prayers

PLEASE TAKE A MOMENT TO CLOSE YOUR EYES, OPEN your heart,
and feel all the love that comes from your heart.
I want you to join with my words in your mind and in your heart, to feel a
very strong connection of love. Together, we are going to do a very special
prayer to experience a communion with our Creator.
Focus your attention on your lungs, as if only your lungs exist. Feel the
pleasure when your lungs expand to fulfill the biggest need of the human body
— to breathe.
Take a deep breath and feel the air as it fills your lungs. Feel how the air is
nothing but love. Notice the connection between the air and the lungs, a
connection of love. Expand your lungs with air until your body has the need to
expel that air. And then exhale, and feel the pleasure again. Because when we
fulfill any need of the human body, it gives us pleasure. To breathe gives us
much pleasure. Just to breathe is enough for us to always be happy, to enjoy
life. Just to be alive is enough. Feel the pleasure to be alive, the pleasure of the
feeling of love….
PRAYER FOR FREEDOM
Today, Creator of the Universe, we ask that you come to us and share with us
a strong communion of love. We know that your real name is Love, that to have
a communion with you means to share the same vibration, the same frequency
that you are, because you are the only thing that exists in the universe.
Today, help us to be like you are, to love life, to be life, to be love. Help us
to love the way you love, with no conditions, no expectations, no obligations,
without any judgment. Help us to love and accept ourselves without any
judgment, because when we judge ourselves, we find ourselves guilty and we
need to be punished.
Help us to love everything you create unconditionally, especially other
human beings, especially those who live around us — all our relatives and
people whom we try so hard to love. Because when we reject them, we reject
ourselves, and when we reject ourselves, we reject You.
Help us to love others just the way they are with no conditions. Help us to
accept them the way they are, without judgment, because if we judge them, we

find them guilty, we blame them, and we have the need to punish them.
Today, clean our hearts of any emotional poison that we have, free our minds
from any judgment so that we can live in complete peace and complete love.
Today is a very special day. Today we open our hearts to love again so that
we can tell each other “I love you,” without any fear, and really mean it. Today,
we offer ourselves to you. Come to us, use our voices, use our eyes, use our
hands, and use our hearts to share ourselves in a communion of love with
everyone. Today, Creator, help us to be just like you are. Thank you for
everything that we receive this day, especially for the freedom to be who we
really are. Amen.
PRAYER FOR LOVE
We are going to share a beautiful dream together — a dream that you will
love to have all of the time. In this dream you are in the middle of a beautiful,
warm sunny day. You hear the birds, the wind, and a little river. You walk
toward the river. At the edge of the river is an old man in meditation, and you
see that out of his head comes a beautiful light of different colors. You try not to
bother him, but he notices your presence and opens his eyes. He has the kind of
eyes that are full of love and a big smile. You ask him how he is able to radiate
all that beautiful light. You ask him if he can teach you to do what he is doing.
He replies that many, many, years ago he asked the same question of his
teacher.
The old man begins to tell you his story: “My teacher opened his chest and
took out his heart, and he took a beautiful flame from his heart. Then he opened
my chest, opened my heart, and he put that little flame inside it. He put my heart
back in my chest, and as soon as my heart was inside me, I felt intense love,
because the flame he put in my heart was his own love.
“That flame grew in my heart and became a big, big fire — a fire that doesn’t
burn, but purifies everything that it touches. And that fire touched each one of
the cells of my body, and the cells of my body loved me back. I became one
with my body, but my love grew even more. That fire touched every emotion of
my mind, and all the emotions transformed into a strong and intense love. And I
loved myself, completely and unconditionally.
“But the fire kept burning and I had the need to share my love. I decided to
put a little piece of my love in every tree, and the trees loved me back, and I
became one with the trees, but my love did not stop, it grew more. I put a piece
of love in every flower, in the grass, in the earth and they loved me back, and

we became one. And my love grew more and more to love every animal in the
world. They responded to my love and they loved me back, and we became
one. But my love kept growing and growing.
“I put a piece of my love in every crystal, in every stone in the ground, in the
dirt, in the metals, and they loved me back, and I became one with the earth.
And then I decided to put my love in the water, in the oceans, in the rivers, in
the rain, in the snow. And they loved me back and we became one. And still my
love grew more and more. I decided to give my love to the air, to the wind. I
felt a strong communion with the earth, with the wind, with the oceans, with
nature, and my love grew and grew.
“I turned my head to the sky, to the sun, to the stars, and put a little piece of
my love in every star, in the moon, in the sun, and they loved me back. And I
became one with the moon and the sun and the stars, and my love kept growing
and growing. And I put a little piece of my love in every human, and I became
one with the whole of humanity. Wherever I go, whomever I meet, I see myself
in their eyes, because I am a part of everything, because I love.”
And then the old man opens his own chest, takes out his heart with that
beautiful flame inside, and he puts that flame in your heart. And now that love is
growing inside of you. Now you are one with the wind, with the water, with the
stars, with all of nature, with all animals, and with all humans. You feel the heat
and the light emanating from the flame in your heart. Out of your head shines a
beautiful light of different colors. You are radiant with the glow of love and
you pray:
Thank you, Creator of the Universe, for the gift of life you have given me.
Thank you for giving me everything that I have ever truly needed. Thank you for
the opportunity to experience this beautiful body and this wonderful mind.
Thank you for living inside me with all your love, with your pure and boundless
spirit, with your warm and radiant light.
Thank you for using my words, for using my eyes, for using my heart to share
your love wherever I go. I love you just the way you are, and because I am your
creation, I love myself just the way I am. Help me to keep the love and the
peace in my heart and to make that love a new way of life, that I may live in
love the rest of my life. Amen.

ALSO FROM AMBER-ALLEN PUBLISHING
The Four Agreements Companion Book by don Miguel Ruiz*
Additional insights, practice ideas, questions and answers about applying The
Four Agreements, and true stories from people who have already transformed
their lives.
The Four Agreements Gift Edition by don Miguel Ruiz*
A linen-bound hardcover edition of this classic bestseller, with two-color
printing and a silk ribbon marker. An ideal gift for a special friend. Also
available in audiobook.
Toltec Wisdom Card Decks by don Miguel Ruiz
Each card deck contains 48 beautifully illustrated cards with pearls of wisdom
fr o m The Four Agreements, The Mastery of Love, and The Voice of
Knowledge.
Prayers: A Communion with our Creator by don Miguel Ruiz*
A beautiful collection of prayers, guided meditations, and powerful prose that
will inspire and transform your life.
The Voice of Knowledge by don Miguel Ruiz*
Ruiz transforms complex human issues into simple common sense. He tells us
that all of our emotional suffering is because we believe in lies — mainly about
ourselves. Also available in audiobook.
The Mastery of Love by don Miguel Ruiz*
Ruiz shows us how to heal our emotional wounds, recover the joy and freedom
that are our birthright, and restore the spirit of playfulness that is vital to loving
relationships. Available in paperback, cloth gift edition, and audiobook.
The Fifth Agreement by don Miguel Ruiz and don Jose Ruiz
In this long-awaited sequel to The Four Agreements, don Miguel Ruiz
collaborates with his son, don Jose Ruiz, to offer another powerful agreement
for transforming our lives. The fifth agreement encourages us to see the truth, to
recover our authenticity, and to change the message we deliver not only to
ourselves, but to everyone around us.

The Happiness Project
Or, Why I Spent a Year Trying to Sing in the Morning, Clean
My Closets, Fight Right, Read Aristotle, and Generally
Have More Fun

Gretchen Rubin

FOR MY FAMILY

SAMUEL JOHNSON: “As the Spanish proverb says,
‘He, who would bring home the wealth of the
Indies, must carry the wealth of the Indies with
him.’”
—JAMES BOSWELL, THE LIFE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON
There is no duty we so much underrate as the duty
of being happy.
—ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

Contents
Epigraph
A Note to the Reader
Getting Started
1 January: Boost Energy
Vitality
2 February: Remember Love
Marriage
3 March: Aim Higher
Work
4 April: Lighten Up
Parenthood
5 May: Be Serious About Play
Leisure
6 June: Make Time for Friends
Friendship
7 July: Buy Some Happiness
Money
8 August: Contemplate the Heavens
Eternity

9 September: Pursue a Passion
Books
10 October: Pay Attention
Mindfulness
11 November: Keep a Contented Heart
Attitude
12 December: Boot Camp Perfect
Happiness
Afterword
Acknowledgments
Your Happiness Project
Suggestions for Further Reading
About the Author
Other Books by Gretchen Rubin
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher

A NOTE TO THE READER
A “happiness project” is an approach to changing your life.
First is the preparation stage, when you identify what brings
you joy, satisfaction, and engagement, and also what
brings you guilt, anger, boredom, and remorse. Second is
the making of resolutions, when you identify the concrete
actions that will boost your happiness. Then comes the
interesting part: keeping your resolutions.
This book is the story of my happiness project—what I
tried, what I learned. Your project would look different from
mine, but it’s the rare person who can’t benefit from a
happiness project. To help you think about your own
happiness project, I regularly post suggestions on my blog,
and I’ve also created a Web site, the Happiness Project
Toolbox, that provides tools to help you create and track
your happiness project.
But I hope that the most compelling inspiration for your
happiness project is the book you hold in your hands. Of
course, because it’s the story of my happiness project, it
reflects my particular situation, values, and interests. “Well,”
you might think, “if everyone’s happiness project is unique,
why should I bother to read about her project?”
During my study of happiness, I noticed something that
surprised me: I often learn more from one person’s highly
idiosyncratic experiences than I do from sources that detail

universal principles or cite up-to-date studies. I find greater
value in what specific individuals tell me worked for them
than in any other kind of argument—and that’s true even
when we seem to have nothing in common. In my case, for
example, I would never have supposed that a witty
lexicographer with Tourette’s syndrome, a twentysomething tubercular saint, a hypocritical Russian novelist,
and one of the Founding Fathers would be my most helpful
guides—but so it happened.
I hope that reading the account of my happiness project
will encourage you to start your own. Whenever you read
this, and wherever you are, you are in the right place to
begin.

GETTING STARTED
I’d always vaguely expected to outgrow my limitations.
One day, I’d stop twisting my hair, and wearing running
shoes all the time, and eating exactly the same food every
day. I’d remember my friends’ birthdays, I’d learn
Photoshop, I wouldn’t let my daughter watch TV during
breakfast. I’d read Shakespeare. I’d spend more time
laughing and having fun, I’d be more polite, I’d visit
museums more often, I wouldn’t be scared to drive.
One April day, on a morning just like every other morning,
I had a sudden realization: I was in danger of wasting my
life. As I stared out the rain-spattered window of a city bus, I
saw that the years were slipping by. “What do I want from
life, anyway?” I asked myself. “Well…I want to be happy.”
But I had never thought about what made me happy or how I
might be happier.
I had much to be happy about. I was married to Jamie,
the tall, dark, and handsome love of my life; we had two
delightful young daughters, seven-year-old Eliza and oneyear-old Eleanor; I was a writer, after having started out as
a lawyer; I was living in my favorite city, New York; I had
close relationships with my parents, sister, and in-laws; I
had friends; I had my health; I didn’t have to color my hair.
But too often I sniped at my husband or the cable guy. I felt
dejected after even a minor professional setback. I drifted

out of touch with old friends, I lost my temper easily, I
suffered bouts of melancholy, insecurity, listlessness, and
free-floating guilt.
As I looked out the blurry bus window, I saw two figures
cross the street—a woman about my age trying
simultaneously to balance an umbrella, look at her cell
phone, and push a stroller carrying a yellow-slickered child.
The sight gave me a jolt of recognition: that’s me, I thought,
there I am. I have a stroller, a cell phone, an alarm clock, an
apartment, a neighborhood. Right now, I’m riding the same
crosstown bus that I take across the park, back and forth.
This is my life—but I never give any thought to it.
I wasn’t depressed and I wasn’t having a midlife crisis,
but I was suffering from midlife malaise—a recurrent sense
of discontent and almost a feeling of disbelief. “Can this be
me?” I’d wonder as I picked up the morning newspapers or
sat down to read my e-mail. “Can this be me?” My friends
and I joked about the “beautiful house” feeling, when, as in
the David Byrne song “Once in a Lifetime,” we’d
periodically experience the shock of thinking “This is not my
beautiful house.”
“Is this really it?” I found myself wondering, and
answering, “Yep, this is it.”
But though at times I felt dissatisfied, that something was
missing, I also never forgot how fortunate I was. When I
woke up in the middle of the night, as I often did, I’d walk
from one room to another to gaze at my sleeping husband
tangled in the sheets and my daughters surrounded by their

stuffed animals, all safe. I had everything I could possibly
want—yet I was failing to appreciate it. Bogged down in
petty complaints and passing crises, weary of struggling
with my own nature, I too often failed to comprehend the
splendor of what I had. I didn’t want to keep taking these
days for granted. The words of the writer Colette had
haunted me for years: “What a wonderful life I’ve had! I only
wish I’d realized it sooner.” I didn’t want to look back, at the
end of my life or after some great catastrophe, and think,
“How happy I used to be then, if only I’d realized it.”
I needed to think about this. How could I discipline myself
to feel grateful for my ordinary day? How could I set a
higher standard for myself as a wife, a mother, a writer, a
friend? How could I let go of everyday annoyances to keep
a larger, more transcendent perspective? I could barely
remember to stop at the drugstore to buy toothpaste—it
didn’t seem realistic to think that I could incorporate these
high aims into my everyday routine.
The bus was hardly moving, but I could hardly keep pace
with my own thoughts. “I’ve got to tackle this,” I told myself.
“As soon as I have some free time, I should start a
happiness project.” But I never had any free time. When life
was taking its ordinary course, it was hard to remember
what really mattered; if I wanted a happiness project, I’d
have to make the time. I had a brief vision of myself living
for a month on a picturesque, windswept island, where
each day I would gather seashells, read Aristotle, and write
in an elegant parchment journal. Nope, I admitted, that’s not
going to happen. I needed to find a way to do it here and

now. I needed to change the lens through which I viewed
everything familiar.
All these thoughts flooded through my mind, and as I sat
on that crowded bus, I grasped two things: I wasn’t as
happy as I could be, and my life wasn’t going to change
unless I made it change. In that single moment, with that
realization, I decided to dedicate a year to trying to be
happier.
I made up my mind on a Tuesday morning, and by
Wednesday afternoon, I had a stack of library books
teetering on the edge of my desk. I could hardly find room
for them; my tiny office, perched on the roof of our
apartment building, was already too crowded with
reference materials for the Kennedy biography I was
writing, mixed with notices from my daughter Eliza’s firstgrade teacher about class trips, strep throat, and a food
drive.
I couldn’t just jump into this happiness project. I had a lot
to learn before I was ready for my year to begin. After my
first few weeks of heavy reading, as I toyed with different
ideas about how to set up my experiment, I called my
younger sister, Elizabeth.
After listening to a twenty-minute disquisition on my initial
thoughts on happiness, my sister said, “I don’t think you
realize just how weird you are—but,” she added hastily, “in
a good way.”
“Everyone is weird. That’s why everyone’s happiness

project would be different. We’re all idiosyncratic.”
“Maybe, but I just don’t think you realize how funny it is to
hear you talk about it.”
“Why is it funny?”
“It’s just that you’re approaching the question of
happiness in such a dogged, systematic way.”
I didn’t understand what she meant. “You mean how I’m
trying to turn goals like ‘Contemplate death’ or ‘Embrace
now’ into action items?”
“Exactly,” she answered. “I don’t even know what an
‘action item’ is.”
“That’s business school jargon.”
“Okay, whatever. All I’m saying is, your happiness project
reveals more about you than you realize.”
Of course she was right. They say that people teach what
they need to learn. By adopting the role of happiness
teacher, if only for myself, I was trying to find the method to
conquer my particular faults and limitations.
It was time to expect more of myself. Yet as I thought
about happiness, I kept running up against paradoxes. I
wanted to change myself but accept myself. I wanted to
take myself less seriously—and also more seriously. I
wanted to use my time well, but I also wanted to wander, to
play, to read at whim. I wanted to think about myself so I
could forget myself. I was always on the edge of agitation; I
wanted to let go of envy and anxiety about the future, yet
keep my energy and ambition. Elizabeth’s observation
made me wonder about my motivations. Was I searching
for spiritual growth and a life more dedicated to

transcendent principles—or was my happiness project just
an attempt to extend my driven, perfectionist ways to every
aspect of my life?
My happiness project was both. I wanted to perfect my
character, but, given my nature, that would probably involve
charts, deliverables, to-do lists, new vocabulary terms, and
compulsive note taking.
Many of the greatest minds have tackled the question of
happiness, so as I started my research, I plunged into
Plato, Boethius, Montaigne, Bertrand Russell, Thoreau, and
Schopenhauer. The world’s great religions explain the
nature of happiness, so I explored a wide range of
traditions, from the familiar to the esoteric. Scientific
interest in positive psychology has exploded in the last few
decades, and I read Martin Seligman, Daniel Kahneman,
Daniel Gilbert, Barry Schwartz, Ed Diener, Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, and Sonja Lyubomirsky. Popular culture,
too, is bursting with happiness experts, so I consulted
everyone from Oprah to Julie Morgenstern to David Allen.
Some of the most interesting insights on happiness came
from my favorite novelists, such as Leo Tolstoy, Virginia
Woolf, and Marilynne Robinson—in fact, some novels, such
as Michael Frayn’s A Landing on the Sun , Ann Patchett’s
Bel Canto, and Ian McEwan’s Saturday, seemed to be the
careful working out of theories of happiness.
One minute I was reading philosophy and biography; the
next, Psychology Today. The pile of books next to my bed

included Malcolm Gladwell’s Blink, Adam Smith’s The
Theory of Moral Sentiments, Elizabeth von Arnim’s
Elizabeth and Her German Garden, the Dalai Lama’s The
Art of Happiness, and “FlyLady” Marla Cilley’s Sink
Reflections. At dinner with friends, I found wisdom in a
fortune cookie: “Look for happiness under your own roof.”
My reading showed me that I had to answer two crucial
questions before I went any further. First, did I believe it was
possible to make myself happier? After all, the “set-point”
theory holds that a person’s basic level of happiness
doesn’t fluctuate much, except briefly.
My conclusion: yes, it is possible.
According to current research, in the determination of a
person’s level of happiness, genetics accounts for about 50
percent; life circumstances, such as age, gender, ethnicity,
marital status, income, health, occupation, and religious
affiliation, account for about 10 to 20 percent; and the
remainder is a product of how a person thinks and acts. In
other words, people have an inborn disposition that’s set
within a certain range, but they can boost themselves to the
top of their happiness range or push themselves down to
the bottom of their happiness range by their actions. This
finding confirmed my own observations. It seems obvious
that some people are more naturally ebullient or
melancholic than others and that, at the same time,
people’s decisions about how to live their lives also affect
their happiness.
The second question: What is “happiness”?

In law school, we’d spent an entire semester discussing
the meaning of a “contract,” and as I dug into my happiness
research, this training kicked in. In scholarship, there is
merit in defining terms precisely, and one positive
psychology study identified fifteen different academic
definitions of happiness, but when it came to my project,
spending a lot of energy exploring the distinctions among
“positive affect,” “subjective well-being,” “hedonic tone,” and
a myriad of other terms didn’t seem necessary. I didn’t want
to get stuck in a question that didn’t particularly interest me.
I decided instead to follow the hallowed tradition set by
Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart, who defined
obscenity by saying “I know it when I see it,” and Louis
Armstrong, who said, “If you have to ask what jazz is, you’ll
never know,” and A. E. Housman, who wrote that he “could
no more define poetry than a terrier can define a rat” but
that he “recognized the object by the symptoms it evokes.”
Aristotle declared happiness to be the summum bonum,
the chief good; people desire other things, such as power
or wealth or losing ten pounds, because they believe they
will lead to happiness, but their real goal is happiness.
Blaise Pascal argued, “All men seek happiness. This is
without exception. Whatever different means they employ,
they all tend to this end.” One study showed that, all over the
world, when asked what they want most from life—and what
they want most for their children—people answered that
they want happiness. Even people who can’t agree on what
it means to be “happy” can agree that most people can be
“happier,” according to their own particular definition. I

know when I feel happy. That was good enough for my
purposes.
I came to another important conclusion about defining
happiness: that the opposite of happiness is unhappiness,
n o t depression. Depression, a grave condition that
deserves urgent attention, occupies its own category apart
from happiness and unhappiness. Addressing its causes
and remedies was far beyond the scope of my happiness
project. But even though I wasn’t depressed and I wasn’t
going to attempt to deal with depression in my framework,
there remained much ground to cover—just because I
wasn’t depressed didn’t mean that I couldn’t benefit from
trying to be happier.
Having determined that it was possible to boost my
happiness level and that I knew what it meant to be “happy,”
I had to figure out how, exactly, to make myself happier.
Could I discover a startling new secret about happiness?
Probably not.
People have been thinking about happiness for
thousands of years, and the great truths about happiness
have already been laid out by the most brilliant minds in
history. Everything important has been said before. (Even
that statement. It was Alfred North Whitehead who said,
“Everything important has been said before.”) The laws of
happiness are as fixed as the laws of chemistry.
But even though I wasn’t making up these laws, I needed
to grapple with them for myself. It’s like dieting. We all
know the secret of dieting—eat better, eat less, exercise

more—it’s the application that’s challenging. I had to create
a scheme to put happiness ideas into practice in my life.
Founding Father Benjamin Franklin is one of the patron
saints of self-realization. In his Autobiography, he
describes how he designed his Virtues Chart as part of a
“bold and arduous Project of arriving at moral Perfection.”
He identified thirteen virtues he wanted to cultivate—
temperance, silence, order, resolution, frugality, industry,
sincerity, justice, moderation, cleanliness, tranquillity,
chastity, and humility—and made a chart with those virtues
plotted against the days of the week. Each day, Franklin
would score himself on whether he practiced those thirteen
virtues.
Current research underscores the wisdom of his chartkeeping approach. People are more likely to make
progress on goals that are broken into concrete,
measurable actions, with some kind of structured
accountability and positive reinforcement. Also, according
to a current theory of the brain, the unconscious mind does
crucial work in forming judgments, motives, and feelings
outside our awareness or conscious control, and one factor
that influences the work of the unconscious is the
“accessibility” of information, or the ease with which it
comes to mind. Information that has been recently called up
or frequently used in the past is easier to retrieve and
therefore energized. The concept of “accessibility”
suggested to me that by constantly reminding myself of

certain goals and ideas, I could keep them more active in
my mind.
So, inspired by recent science and by Ben Franklin’s
method, I designed my own version of his scoring chart—a
kind of calendar on which I could record all my resolutions
and give myself a daily (good) or X (bad) for each
resolution.
After I designed my blank chart, however, it took me a
long time to determine which resolutions should fill the
boxes. Franklin’s thirteen virtues didn’t match the kinds of
changes I wanted to cultivate. I wasn’t particularly
concerned with “cleanliness” (though, come to think of it, I
could do a better job of flossing). What should I do to
become happier?
First I had to identify the areas to work on; then I had to
come up with happiness-boosting resolutions that were
concrete and measurable. For example, everyone from
Seneca to Martin Seligman agreed that friendship is a key
to happiness, and sure, I wanted to strengthen my
friendships. The trick was to figure out how, exactly, I could
accomplish the changes I sought. I wanted to be specific,
so I’d know exactly what I was expecting from myself.
As I reflected on possible resolutions, it struck me again
how much my happiness project would differ from anyone
else’s. Franklin’s top priorities included “Temperance”
(“Eat not to Dulness. Drink not to Elevation”) and “Silence”
(less “Prattling, Punning and Joking”). Other people might
resolve to start going to the gym, or to give up smoking, or
to improve their sex lives, or to learn to swim, or to start

volunteering—I didn’t need to make those particular
resolutions. I had my own idiosyncratic priorities, with many
items included on the list that other people would have
omitted and many items omitted from the list that other
people would have included.
For example, a friend asked, “Aren’t you going to start
therapy?”
“No,” I asked, surprised. “Why, do you think I should?”
“Absolutely. It’s essential. You have to go to therapy if
you want to know the root causes of your behavior,” she
answered. “Don’t you want to know why you are the way you
are and why you want your life to be different?”
I thought those questions over for a good while, and then I
decided—well, no, not really. Did that mean I was
superficial? I knew many people for whom therapy had
been invaluable, but the issues I wanted to tackle were right
there for me to see, and at this point, I wanted to discover
what approach I’d take, on my own.
I wanted to focus on a different subject each month, and
twelve months in the year gave me twelve slots to fill.
Research had taught me that the most important element to
happiness is social bonds, so I resolved to tackle
“Marriage,” “Parenthood,” and “Friends.” I’d also learned
that that my happiness depended a great deal on my
perspective, so I added “Eternity” and “Attitude” to my list.
Work was crucial to my happiness, and also leisure, so I
included the topics “Work,” “Play,” and “Passion.” What
else did I want to cover? “Energy” seemed like a basic

ingredient for the success of the entire project. “Money”
was a subject I knew I wanted to address. To explore some
of the insights I’d come across in my research, I added
“Mindfulness.” December would be a month in which I
would try to follow all my resolutions perfectly—so that gave
me my twelve categories.
But what subject should come first? What was the most
important element in happiness? I hadn’t figured that out
yet, but I decided to tackle “Energy” first. A high level of
energy would make keeping all my other resolutions easier.
Just in time for January 1, when I planned to start my project
rolling, I completed my chart with dozens of resolutions to
try in the coming year. For the first month, I’d attempt only
January’s resolutions; in February, I’d add the next set of
resolutions to the January set. By December, I’d be scoring
myself on the whole year’s worth of resolutions.
As I worked to identify my resolutions, some overarching
principles started to emerge. Distilling these principles
turned out to be far more taxing than I expected, but after
many additions and subtractions, I arrived at my Twelve
Commandments:
TWELVE COMMANDMENTS

1.
2.
3.
4.

Be Gretchen.
Let it go.
Act the way I want to feel.
Do it now.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Be polite and be fair.
Enjoy the process.
Spend out.
Identify the problem.
Lighten up.
Do what ought to be done.
No calculation.
There is only love.

These Twelve Commandments, I predicted, would help
me as I was struggling to keep my resolutions.
I also came up with a goofier list: my Secrets of
Adulthood. These were the lessons I’d learned with some
difficulty as I’d grown up. I’m not sure why it took me years
to embrace the notion that over-the-counter medication
actually would cure a headache, but it had.
SECRETS OF ADULTHOOD

People don’t notice your mistakes as much as you think.
It’s okay to ask for help.
Most decisions don’t require extensive research.
Do good, feel good.
It’s important to be nice to everyone.
Bring a sweater.
By doing a little bit each day, you can get a lot
accomplished.
Soap and water remove most stains.
Turning the computer on and off a few times often fixes a

glitch.
If you can’t find something, clean up.
You can choose what you do; you can’t choose what you
like to do.
Happiness doesn’t always make you feel happy.
What you do every day matters more than what you do

once in a while.
You don’t have to be good at everything.
If you’re not failing, you’re not trying hard enough.
Over-the-counter medicines are very effective.
Don’t let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
What’s fun for other people may not be fun for you—and
vice versa.
People actually prefer that you buy wedding gifts off their
registry.
You can’t profoundly change your children’s natures by
nagging them or signing them up for classes.
No deposit, no return.
I had fun coming up with my Twelve Commandments and
my Secrets of Adulthood, but the heart of my happiness
project remained my list of resolutions, which embodied the
changes I wanted to make in my life. When I stepped back
to reflect on the resolutions, however, I was struck by their
small scale. Take January. “Go to sleep earlier” and
“Tackle a nagging task” didn’t sound dramatic or colorful or
particularly ambitious.
Other people’s radical happiness projects, such as
Henry David Thoreau’s move to Walden Pond or Elizabeth

Gilbert’s move to Italy, India, and Indonesia, exhilarated me.
The fresh start, the total commitment, the leap into the
unknown—I found their quests illuminating, plus I got a
vicarious thrill from their abandonment of everyday worries.
But my project wasn’t like that. I was an unadventurous
soul, and I didn’t want to undertake that kind of
extraordinary change. Which was lucky, because I wouldn’t
have been able to do it even if I’d wanted to. I had a family
and responsibilities that made it practically impossible for
me to leave for one weekend, let alone for a year.
And more important, I didn’t want to reject my life. I
wanted to change my life without changing my life, by
finding more happiness in my own kitchen. I knew I wouldn’t
discover happiness in a faraway place or in unusual
circumstances; it was right here, right now—as in the
haunting play The Blue Bird, where two children spend a
year searching the world for the Blue Bird of Happiness,
only to find the bird waiting for them when they finally return
home.
A lot of people took issue with my happiness project.
Starting with my own husband.
“I don’t really get it,” Jamie said as he lay on the floor to
do his daily back and knee exercises. “You’re already
pretty happy, aren’t you? If you were really unhappy, this
would make more sense, but you’re not.” He paused.
“You’re not unhappy, are you?”
“ I am happy,” I reassured him. “Actually,” I added,

pleased to have an opportunity to show off my new
expertise, “most people are pretty happy—in a 2006 study,
eighty-four percent of Americans ranked themselves as
‘very happy’ or ‘pretty happy,’ and in a survey of forty-five
countries, on average, people put themselves at 7 on a 1 to
10 scale and at 75 on a 1 to 100 scale. I just took the
Authentic Happiness Inventory Questionnaire myself, and
on a range of 1 to 5, I scored a 3.92.”
“So if you’re pretty happy, why do a happiness project?”
“I am happy—but I’m not as happy as I should be. I have
such a good life, I want to appreciate it more—and live up
to it better.” I had a hard time explaining it. “I complain too
much, I get annoyed more than I should. I should be more
grateful. I think if I felt happier, I’d behave better.”
“Do you really think any of this is going to make a
difference?” he asked, pointing to the printout of my first
blank Resolutions Chart.
“Well, I’ll find out.”
“Huh,” he snorted. “I guess so.”
I ran into even more skepticism soon after, at a cocktail
party. The usual polite chitchat devolved into a conversation
more closely resembling a Ph.D. dissertation defense
when a longtime acquaintance openly scoffed at the idea of
my happiness project.
“Your project is to see if you can make yourself happier?
And you’re not even depressed?” he asked.
“That’s right,” I answered, trying to look intelligent as I
juggled a glass of wine, a napkin, and a fancy version of a
pig in a blanket.

“No offense, but what’s the point? I don’t think examining
how an ordinary person can become happier is very
interesting.”
I wasn’t sure how to answer. Could I tell him that one
Secret of Adulthood is “Never start a sentence with the
words ‘No offense’”?
“And anyway,” he persisted, “you’re not a regular person.
You’re highly educated, you’re a full-time writer, you live on
the Upper East Side, your husband has a good job. What
do you have to say to someone in the Midwest?”
“I’m from the Midwest,” I said weakly.
He waved that away. “I just don’t think you’re going to
have insights that other people would find useful.”
“Well,” I answered, “I’ve come to believe that people
really can learn a lot from each other.”
“I think you’ll find that your experience doesn’t translate
very well.”
“I’ll do my best,” I answered. Then I walked away to find
someone else to talk to.
This guy, discouraging as he’d been, hadn’t actually hit
on my real worry about my project: Was it supremely selfcentered to spend so much effort on my own happiness?
I gave this question a lot of thought. In the end, I sided
with the ancient philosophers and modern scientists who
argue that working to be happier is a worthy goal.
According to Aristotle, “Happiness is the meaning and the
purpose of life, the whole aim and end of human existence.”
Epicurus wrote, “We must exercise ourselves in the things
which bring happiness, since, if that be present, we have

everything, and, if that be absent, all our actions are
directed toward attaining it.” Contemporary research shows
that happy people are more altruistic, more productive,
more helpful, more likable, more creative, more resilient,
more interested in others, friendlier, and healthier. Happy
people make better friends, colleagues, and citizens. I
wanted to be one of those people.
I knew it was certainly easier for me to be good when I
was happy. I was more patient, more forgiving, more
energetic, more lighthearted, and more generous. Working
on my happiness wouldn’t just make me happier, it would
boost the happiness of the people around me.
And—though I didn’t recognize this immediately—I
started my happiness project because I wanted to prepare.
I was a very fortunate person, but the wheel would turn. One
dark night, my phone was going to ring, and I already had a
notion about one particular phone call that might come. One
of my goals for the happiness project was to prepare for
adversity—to develop the self-discipline and the mental
habits to deal with a bad thing when it happened. The time
to start exercising, stop nagging, and organize our digital
photos was when everything was going smoothly. I didn’t
want to wait for a crisis to remake my life.

1
JANUARY
Boost Energy

VITALITY

Go to sleep earlier.
Exercise better.
Toss, restore, organize.
Tackle a nagging task.
Act more energetic.

Like

44 percent of Americans, I make New Year’s
resolutions—and usually don’t keep them for long. How
many times had I resolved to exercise more, eat better, and
keep up with my e-mail in-box? This year, though, I was
making my resolutions in the context of my happiness
project, and I hoped that would mean that I’d do a better job
of keeping them. To launch the new year and my happiness
project, I decided to focus on boosting my energy. More
vitality, I hoped, would make it easier for me to stick to all
my happiness-project resolutions in future months.
In a virtuous circle, research shows, being happy
energizes you, and at the same time, having more energy

makes it easier for you to engage in activities—like
socializing and exercise—that boost happiness. Studies
also show that when you feel energetic, your self-esteem
rises. Feeling tired, on the other hand, makes everything
seem arduous. An activity that you’d ordinarily find fun, like
putting up holiday decorations, feels difficult, and a more
demanding task, like learning a new software program,
feels overwhelming.
I know that when I feel energetic, I find it much easier to
behave in ways that make me happy. I take the time to email the grandparents with a report from the pediatrician’s
checkup. I don’t scold when Eliza drops her glass of milk on
the rug just as we’re leaving for school. I have the
perseverance to figure out why my computer screen is
frozen. I take the time to put my dishes in the dishwasher.
I decided to tackle both the physical and mental aspects
of energy.
For my physical energy: I needed to make sure that I got
enough sleep and enough exercise. Although I’d already
known that sleep and exercise were important to good
health, I’d been surprised to learn that happiness—which
can seem like a complex, lofty, and intangible goal—was
quite influenced by these straightforward habits. For my
mental energy: I needed to tackle my apartment and office,
which felt oppressively messy and crowded. Outer order, I
hoped, would bring inner peace. What’s more, I needed to
clear away metaphorical clutter; I wanted to cross tasks off
my to-do list. I added one last resolution that combined the
mental and the physical. Studies show that by acting as if

you feel more energetic, you can become more energetic. I
was skeptical, but it seemed worth a try.
GO TO SLEEP EARLIER.
First: bodily energy.
A glamorous friend with a tendency to make sweeping
pronouncements had told me that “Sleep is the new sex,”
and I’d recently been at a dinner party where each person
at the table detailed the best nap he or she had ever had, in
lascivious detail, while everyone moaned in appreciation.
Millions of people fail to get the recommended seven to
eight hours of sleep a night, and one study revealed that
along with tight work deadlines, a bad night’s sleep was
one of the top two factors that upset people’s daily moods.
Another study suggested that getting one extra hour of
sleep each night would do more for a person’s daily
happiness than getting a $60,000 raise. Nevertheless, the
average adult sleeps only 6.9 hours during the week, and
7.9 on the weekend—20 percent less than in 1900.
Although people adjust to feeling sleepy, sleep deprivation
impairs memory, weakens the immune system, slows
metabolism, and might, some studies suggest, foster
weight gain.
My new, not-exactly-startling resolution for getting more
sleep was to turn off the light. Too often I stayed up to read,
answer e-mails, watch TV, pay bills, or whatever, instead of
going to bed.

Nevertheless, just a few days into the happiness project,
although I practically fell asleep on Eliza’s purple sheets as I
was tucking her in, I wavered for a moment when Jamie
proposed watching our latest Netflix DVD, The
Conversation. I love movies; I wanted to spend time with
Jamie; 9:30 P.M. seemed a ridiculously early hour to go to
bed; and I knew from experience that if I started watching,
I’d perk up. On the other hand, I felt exhausted.
Why does it often seem more tiring to go to bed than to
stay up? Inertia, I suppose. Plus there’s the prebed work of
taking out my contact lenses, brushing my teeth, and
washing my face. But I’d made my resolution, so resolutely I
headed to bed. I slept eight solid hours and woke up an
hour early, at 5:30 A.M., so in addition to getting a good
night’s sleep, I had the chance to do a peaceful block of
work while my family was still in bed.
I’m a real know-it-all, so I was pleased when my sister
called and complained of insomnia. Elizabeth is five years
younger than I am, but usually I’m the one asking her for
advice.
“I’m not getting any sleep,” she said. “I’ve already given
up caffeine. What else can I do?”
“Lots of things,” I said, prepared to rattle off the tips that
I’d uncovered in my research. “Near your bedtime, don’t do
any work that requires alert thinking. Keep your bedroom
slightly chilly. Do a few prebed stretches. Also—this is
important—because light confuses the body’s circadian
clock, keep the lights low around bedtime, say, if you go to
the bathroom. Also, make sure your room is very dark when

the lights are out. Like a hotel room.”
“Do you really think it can make a difference?” she
asked.
“All the studies say that it does.”
I’d tried all these steps myself, and I’d found the last one
—keeping our bedroom dark—surprisingly difficult to
accomplish.
“What are you doing?” Jamie had asked one night when
he caught me rearranging various devices throughout our
room.
“I’m trying to block the light from all these gizmos,” I
answered. “I read that even a tiny light from a digital alarm
clock can disrupt a sleep cycle, and it’s like a mad
scientist’s lab in here. Our BlackBerrys, the computer, the
cable box—everything blinks or glows bright green.”
“Huh” was all he said, but he did help me move some
things on the nightstand to block the light coming from our
alarm clock.
These changes did seem to make falling asleep easier.
But I often lost sleep for another reason: I’d wake up in the
middle of the night—curiously, usually at 3:18 A.M.—and be
unable to go back to sleep. For those nights, I developed
another set of tricks. I breathed deeply and slowly until I
couldn’t stand it anymore. When my mind was racing with a
to-do list, I wrote everything down. There’s evidence that
too little blood flow to the extremities can keep you awake,
so if my feet were cold, I put on wool socks—which, though
it made me feel frumpish, did seem to help.
Two of my most useful getting-to-sleep strategies were

my own invention. First, I tried to get ready for bed well
before bedtime. Sometimes I stayed up late because I was
too tired to take out my contacts—plus, putting on my
glasses had an effect like putting the cover on the parrot’s
cage. Also, if I woke up in the night, I’d tell myself, “I have to
get up in two minutes.” I’d imagine that I’d just hit the
snooze alarm and in two minutes, I’d have to march through
my morning routine. Often this was an exhausting enough
prospect to make me fall asleep.
And sometimes I gave up and took an Ambien.
After a week or so of more sleep, I began to feel a real
difference. I felt more energetic and cheerful with my
children in the morning. I didn’t feel a painful, never-fulfilled
urge to take a nap in the afternoon. Getting out of bed in the
morning was no longer torture; it’s so much nicer to wake
up naturally instead of being jerked out of sleep by a
buzzing alarm.
Nevertheless, despite all the benefits, I still struggled to
put myself to bed as soon as I felt sleepy. Those last few
hours of the day were precious—when the workday was
finished, Jamie was home, my daughters were asleep, and
I had some free time. Only the daily reminder on my
Resolutions Chart kept me from staying up until midnight
most nights.
EXERCISE BETTER.
There’s a staggering amount of evidence to show that

exercise is good for you. Among other benefits, people
who exercise are healthier, think more clearly, sleep better,
and have delayed onset of dementia. Regular exercise
boosts energy levels; although some people assume that
working out is tiring, in fact, it boosts energy, especially in
sedentary people—of whom there are many. A recent study
showed that 25 percent of Americans don’t get any
exercise at all. Just by exercising twenty minutes a day
three days a week for six weeks, persistently tired people
boosted their energy.
Even knowing all these benefits, though, you can find it
difficult to change from a couch potato into a gym
enthusiast. Many years ago, I’d managed to turn myself into
a regular exerciser, but it hadn’t been easy. My idea of fun
has always been to lie in bed reading. Preferably while
eating a snack.
When I was in high school, I wanted to redecorate my
bedroom to replace the stylized flowered wallpaper that I
thought wasn’t sufficiently sophisticated for a freshman, and
I wrote a long proposal laying out my argument to my
parents. My father considered the proposal and said, “All
right, we’ll redecorate your room. But in return, you have to
do something four times a week for twenty minutes.”
“What do I have to do?” I asked, suspicious.
“You have to take it or leave it. It’s twenty minutes. How
bad can it be?”
“Okay, I’ll take the deal,” I decided. “What do I have to
do?”
His answer: “Go for a run.”

My father, himself a dedicated runner, never told me how
far I had to run or how fast; he didn’t even keep track of
whether I went for twenty minutes. All he asked was that I
put on my running shoes and shut the door behind me. My
father’s deal got me to commit to a routine, and once I
started running, I found that I didn’t mind exercising, I just
didn’t like sports.
My father’s approach might well have backfired. With
extrinsic motivation, people act to win external rewards or
avoid external punishments; with intrinsic motivation,
people act for their own satisfaction. Studies show that if
you reward people for doing an activity, they often stop
doing it for fun; being paid turns it into “work.” Parents, for
example, are warned not to reward children for reading—
they’re teaching kids to read for a reward, not for pleasure.
By giving me an extrinsic motivation, my father risked
sapping my inclination to exercise on my own. As it
happened, in my case, he provided an extrinsic motivation
that unleashed my intrinsic motivation.
Ever since that room redecoration, I’ve been exercising
regularly. I never push myself hard, but I get myself out the
door several times a week. For a long time, however, I’d
been thinking that I really should start strength training.
Lifting weights increases muscle mass, strengthens bones,
firms the core, and—I admit, most important to me—
improves shape. People who work out with weights
maintain more muscle and gain less fat as they age. A few
times over the years, I’d halfheartedly tried lifting weights,

but I’d never stuck to it; now, with my resolution to “Exercise
better,” it was time to start.
There’s a Buddhist saying that I’ve found to be uncannily
true: “When the student is ready, the teacher appears.” Just
a few days after I committed to my resolution to “Exercise
better,” I met a friend for coffee, and she mentioned that
she’d started a great weight-training program at a gym in
my neighborhood.
“I don’t like the idea of working out with a trainer,” I
objected. “I’d feel self-conscious, and it’s expensive. I want
to do it on my own.”
“Try it,” my friend urged. “I promise, you’ll love it. It’s a
superefficient way to exercise. The whole workout takes
only twenty minutes. Plus”—she paused dramatically—“you
d o n’ t sweat. You work out without having to shower
afterward.”
This was a major selling point. I dislike taking showers.
“But,” I asked doubtfully, “how can a good workout take only
twenty minutes if you’re not even sweating?”
“You lift weights at the very outer limit of your strength.
You don’t do many repetitions, and you do only one set.
Believe me, it works. I love it.”
In Daniel Gilbert’s book Stumbling on Happiness, he
argues that the most effective way to judge whether a
particular course of action will make you happy in the future
is to ask people who are following that course of action
right now if they’re happy and assume that you’ll feel the
same way. According to his theory, the fact that my friend
raved about this fitness routine was a pretty good indicator

that I’d be enthusiastic, too. Also, I reminded myself, one of
my Secrets of Adulthood was “Most decisions don’t require
extensive research.”
I made an appointment for the next day, and by the time I
left, I was a convert. My trainer was terrific, and the
atmosphere in the training room was much nicer than most
gyms—no music, no mirrors, no crowds, no waiting. On my
way out the door, I charged the maximum twenty-four
sessions on my credit card to get the discount, and within a
month, I’d convinced Jamie and my mother-in-law, Judy, to
start going to the same gym.
The only disadvantage was that it was expensive. “It
seems like a lot to spend for a twenty-minute workout,” I
said to Jamie.
“Would you rather get more for your money?” he asked.
“We’re spending more to get a shorter workout.” Good
point.
In addition to strength training, I wanted to start walking
more. The repetitive activity of walking, studies show,
triggers the body’s relaxation response and so helps
reduce stress; at the same time, even a quick ten-minute
walk provides an immediate energy boost and improves
mood—in fact, exercise is an effective way to snap out of a
funk. Also, I kept reading that, as a minimum of activity for
good health, people should aim to take 10,000 steps a day
—a number that also reportedly keeps most people from
gaining weight.
Living in New York, I felt as if I walked miles every day.
But did I? I picked up a $20 pedometer from the running

store near my apartment. Once I’d been clipping it onto my
belt for a week, I discovered that on days when I did a fair
amount of walking—walking Eliza to school and walking to
the gym, for example—I hit 10,000 easily. On days when I
stayed close to home, I barely cleared 3,000.
It was interesting to have a better sense of my daily
habits. Also, the very fact of wearing a pedometer made
me walk more. One of my worst qualities is my insatiable
need for credit; I always want the gold star, the recognition.
One night when I was in high school, I came home late from
a party and decided to surprise my mother by cleaning up
our messy kitchen. She came downstairs the next morning
and said, “What wonderful fairy came in the night and did all
this work?” and looked so pleased. More than twenty years
later, I still remember that gold star, and I still want more of
them.
This generally negative quality had a benefit in this
circumstance; because the pedometer gave me credit for
making an extra effort, I was more likely to do it. One
morning I’d planned to take the subway to my dentist’s
appointment, but as I walked out the door, it occurred to
me, “Walking to the dentist will take the same amount of
time, and I’ll get credit for the steps!” Plus, I think I benefited
from the “Hawthorne effect,” in which people being studied
improve their performance, simply because of the extra
attention they’re getting. In this case, I was the guinea pig of
my own experiment.
Walking had an added benefit: it helped me to think.

Nietzsche wrote, “All truly great thoughts are conceived
while walking,” and his observation is backed up by
science; exercise-induced brain chemicals help people
think clearly. In fact, just stepping outside clarifies thinking
and boosts energy. Light deprivation is one reason that
people feel tired, and even five minutes of daylight
stimulates production of serotonin and dopamine, brain
chemicals that improve mood. Many times, I’d guiltily leave
my desk to take a break, and while I was walking around
the block, I’d get some useful insight that had eluded me
when I was being virtuously diligent.
TOSS, RESTORE, ORGANIZE.
Household disorder was a constant drain on my energy; the
minute I walked through the apartment door, I felt as if I
needed to start putting clothes in the hamper and gathering
loose toys. I wasn’t alone in my fight against clutter. In a
sign that people are finding their possessions truly
unmanageable, the number of storage units nationwide
practically doubled in one decade. One study suggested
that eliminating clutter would cut down the amount of
housework in the average home by 40 percent.
To use the first month of my happiness project to tackle
clutter seemed a bit small-minded, as if my highest priority
in life were to rearrange my sock drawer. But I craved an
existence of order and serenity—which, translated into real
life, meant a household with coats hung in the closet and

spare rolls of paper towels.
I was also weighed down by the invisible, but even more
enervating, psychic clutter of loose ends. I had a long list of
neglected tasks that made me feel weary and guilty
whenever I thought of them. I needed to clear away the
detritus in my mind.
I decided to tackle the visible clutter first, and I
discovered something surprising: the psychologists and
social scientists who do happiness research never mention
clutter at all. They never raise it in their descriptions of the
factors that contribute to happiness or in their lists of
strategies to boost happiness. The philosophers, too,
ignore it, although Samuel Johnson, who had an opinion
about everything, did remark, “No money is better spent
that what is laid out for domestic satisfaction.”
By contrast, when I turned to popular culture, discussions
of clutter clearing abounded. Whatever the happiness
scientists might study, ordinary people are convinced that
clearing clutter will boost their happiness—and they’re
“laying out money for domestic satisfaction” by buying Real
Simple magazine, reading the Unclutterer blog, hiring
California Closets, and practicing amateur feng shui.
Apparently, other people, like me, believe that their physical
surroundings influence their spiritual happiness.
I paced through our apartment to size up the clutterclearing challenge I faced. Once I started really looking, I
was amazed by how much clutter had accumulated without
my realizing it. Our apartment was bright and pleasant, but
a scum of clutter filmed its surface.

When I surveyed the master bedroom, for example, I was
dismayed. The soft green walls and the rose-and-leaf
pattern on the bed and curtains made the room calm and
inviting, but stacks of papers were piled randomly on the
coffee table and on the floor in the corner. Untidy heaps of
books covered every available surface. CDs, DVDs, cords,
chargers, coins, collar stays, business cards, and
instruction booklets were scattered like confetti. Objects
that needed to be put away, objects that didn’t have a real
place, unidentified lurking objects—they all needed to be
placed in their proper homes. Or tossed or given away.
As I contemplated the magnitude of the job before me, I
invoked my Tenth Commandment: “Do what ought to be
done.” This commandment distilled into one principle a lot
of different strands of advice my mother had given me over
the years. The fact is, I tend to feel overwhelmed by large
tasks and am often tempted to try to make life easier by
cutting corners.
We recently moved, and beforehand, I was panicking at
the thought of everything that needed to be done. What
moving company should we use? Where could we buy
boxes? How would our furniture fit into our new apartment
building’s tiny ser vice elevator? I was paralyzed. My
mother had her usual matter-of-fact, unruffled attitude, and
she reminded me that I should just do what I knew I ought to
do. “It won’t really be that hard,” she said reassuringly when
I called her for a pep talk. “Make a list, do a little bit each
day, and stay calm.” Taking the bar exam, writing thank-you
notes, having a baby, getting our carpets cleaned, checking

endless footnotes as I was finishing my biography of
Winston Churchill…my mother made me feel that nothing
was insurmountable if I did what I knew ought to be done,
little by little.
My evaluation of our apartment revealed that my clutter
came in several distinct varieties. First was nostalgic
clutter, made up of relics I clung to from my earlier life. I
made a mental note that I didn’t need to keep the huge box
of materials I used for the “Business and Regulation of
Television” seminar I taught years ago.
Second was self-righteous conservation clutter, made
up of things that I’ve kept because they’re useful—even
though they’re useless to me. Why was I storing twentythree glass florist-shop vases?
One kind of clutter I saw in other people’s homes but
didn’t suffer from myself was bargain clutter, which results
from buying unnecessary things because they’re on sale. I
did suffer from related freebie clutter—the clutter of gifts,
hand-me-downs, and giveaways that we didn’t use.
Recently my mother-in-law mentioned that she was getting
rid of one of their table lamps, and she asked if we wanted
it.
“Sure,” I said automatically, “it’s a great lamp.” But a few
days later, I thought better of it. The lampshade wasn’t right,
the color wasn’t right, and we didn’t really have a place to
put it.
“Actually,” I e-mailed her later, “we don’t need the lamp.
But thanks.” I’d narrowly missed some freebie clutter.

I also had a problem with crutch clutter. These things I
used but knew I shouldn’t: my horrible green sweatshirt
(bought secondhand more than ten years ago), my eightyear-old underwear with holes and frayed edges. This kind
of clutter drove my mother crazy. “Why do you want to wear
that?” she’d say. She always looked fabulous, while I found
it difficult not to wear shapeless yoga pants and ratty white
T-shirts day after day.
I felt particularly oppressed by aspirational clutter—
things that I owned but only aspired to use: the glue gun I
never mastered, mysteriously specific silver serving pieces
untouched since our wedding, my beige pumps with
superhigh heels. The flip side of aspirational clutter is
outgrown clutter. I discovered a big pile of plastic photo
boxes piled in a drawer. I used them for years, but even
though I like proper picture frames now, I’d held on to the
plastic versions.
The kind of clutter that I found most disagreeable was
buyer’s remorse clutter, when, rather than admit that I’d
made a bad purchase, I hung on to things until somehow I
felt they’d been “used up” by sitting in a closet or on a shelf
—the canvas bag that I’d used only once since I bought it
two years ago, those impractical white pants.
Having sized up the situation, I went straight to the
festering heart of my household clutter: my own closet. I’ve
never been very good at folding, so messy, lopsided towers
of shirts and sweaters jammed the shelves. Too many
items were hung on the clothes rod, so I had to muscle my

way into a mass of wool and cotton to pull anything out. Bits
of socks and T-shirts hung over the edges of the drawers
that I’d forced shut. I’d start my clutter clearing here.
So I could focus properly, I stayed home while Jamie
took the girls to visit his parents for the day. The minute the
elevator door closed behind them, I began.
I’d read suggestions that I should invest in an extra closet
rod or in storage boxes that fit under the bed or in hangers
that would hold four pairs of pants on one rod. For me,
however, there was only one essential tool of clutter
clearing: trash bags. I set aside one bag for throwaways
and one for giveaways and dived in.
First, I got rid of items that no one should be wearing
anymore. Good-bye, baggy yoga pants. Next I pulled out
the items that, realistically, I knew I wouldn’t wear. Goodbye, gray sweater that barely covered my navel. Then the
culling got harder. I liked those brown pants, but I couldn’t
figure out what shoes to wear with them. I liked that dress,
but I never had the right place to wear it. I forced myself to
take the time to make each item work, and if I couldn’t, out
it went. I started to notice my dodges. When I told myself, “I
would wear this,” I meant that I didn’t, in fact, wear it. “I have
worn this” meant that I’d worn it twice in five years. “I could
wear this” meant that I’d never worn it and never would.
Once I’d finished the closet, I went back through it once
again. When I finished, I had four bags full of clothes, and I
could see huge patches of the back of my closet. I no
longer felt drained; instead, I felt exhilarated. No more
being confronted with my mistakes! No more searching in

frustration for a particular white button-down shirt!
Having cleared some space, I craved more. I tried any
trick I could. Why had I been holding on to thirty extra
hangers? I got rid of all but a few extra hangers, which
opened up a considerable amount of space. I got rid of
some shopping bags I’d kept tucked away for years, for no
good reason. I’d planned only on sorting through hanging
items, but, energized and inspired, I attacked my sock and
T-shirt drawers. Instead of pawing around for items to
eliminate, I emptied each drawer completely, and I put back
only the items that I actually wore.
I gloated as I surveyed my now-roomy closet. So much
space. No more guilt. The next day I craved another hit.
“We’re going to do something really fun tonight!” I said to
Jamie in a bright voice as he was checking sports news on
TV.
“What?” he said, immediately suspicious. He kept the
remote control prominently in his hand.
“We’re going to clear out your closet and drawers!”
“Oh. Well, okay,” he said agreeably. I shouldn’t have
been surprised by his reaction; Jamie loves order. He
turned off the TV.
“But we’re not going to get rid of much,” he warned me. “I
wear most of this stuff pretty regularly.”
“Okay, sure,” I said sweetly. We’ll see about that, I
thought.
Going through his closet turned out to be fun. Jamie sat
on the bed while I pulled hangers out of his closet, two at a
time, and he, much less tortured than I, gave a simple

thumbs-up or thumbs-down—except once, when he
insisted, “I’ve never seen that pair of pants before in my
life.” He got rid of a giant bag of clothes.
Over the next few weeks, as I adjusted to my half-empty
closet, I noticed a paradox: although I had far fewer clothes
in front of me, I felt as though I had more to wear—because
everything in my closet was something that I realistically
would wear.
Also, having few clothing choices made me feel happier.
Although people believe they like to have lots of choice, in
fact, having too many choices can be discouraging. Instead
of making people feel more satisfied, a wide range of
options can paralyze them. Studies show that when faced
with two dozen varieties of jam in a grocery store, for
example, or lots of investment options for their pension
plan, people often choose arbitrarily or walk away without
making any choice at all, rather than labor to make a
reasoned choice. I certainly felt happier choosing between
two pairs of black pants that I liked rather than among five
pairs of black pants, the majority of which were either
uncomfortable or unfashionable—and which made me feel
guilty for never wearing them, to boot.
Who knew that doing something so mundane could give
me such a kick? By this point, I was jonesing for more of
the clutter-clearing buzz, so while a pregnant friend opened
her presents at a baby shower, I quizzed my fellow guests
for new strategies.
“Focus on the dump zones,” advised one friend. “You
know, the dining room table, the kitchen counter, the place

where everyone dumps their stuff.”
“Right,” I said. “Our biggest dump zone is a chair in our
bedroom. We never sit in it, we just pile clothes and
magazines on it.”
“Junk attracts more junk. If you clear it off, it’s likely to stay
clear. And here’s another thing,” she continued. “When you
buy any kind of device, put the cords, the manual, all that
stuff in a labeled Ziploc bag. You avoid having a big tangle
of mystery cords, plus when you get rid of the device, you
can get rid of the ancillary parts, too.”
“Try a ‘virtual move,’” another friend added. “I just did it
myself. Walk around your apartment and ask yourself—if I
were moving, would I pack this or get rid of it?”
“ I never keep anything for sentimental reasons alone,”
someone else claimed. “Only if I’m still using it.”
These suggestions were helpful, but that last rule was too
draconian for me. I’d never get rid of the “Justice Never
Rests” T-shirt from the aerobics class I took with Justice
Sandra Day O’Connor when I clerked for her, even though it
never did fit, or the doll-sized outfit that our preemie Eliza
wore when she came home from the hospital. (At least
these items didn’t take up much room. I have a friend who
keeps twelve tennis racquets, left over from her days
playing college tennis.)
When one of my college roommates visited New York,
we waxed lyrical over coffee about the glories of clutter
clearing.
“What in life,” I demanded, “gives immediate gratification
equal to cleaning out a medicine cabinet? Nothing!”

“No, nothing,” she agreed with equal fervor. But she took
it even further. “You know, I keep an empty shelf.”
“What do you mean?”
“I keep one shelf, somewhere in my house, completely
empty. I’ll pack every other shelf to the top, but I keep one
shelf bare.”
I was struck by the poetry of this resolution. An empty
shelf! And she had three children. An empty shelf meant
possibility; space to expand; a luxurious waste of
something useful for the sheer elegance of it. I had to have
one. I went home, went straight to my hall closet, and
emptied a shelf. It wasn’t a big shelf, but it was empty.
Thrilling.
I hunted through the apartment, and no object, no matter
how small, escaped my scrutiny. I’d long been annoyed by
the maddening accumulation of gimcracks that children
attract. Glittery superballs, miniature flashlights, small
plastic zoo animals…this stuff was everywhere. It was fun to
have and the girls wanted to keep it, but it was hard to put it
away, because where did it go?
My Eighth Commandment is “Identify the problem.” I’d
realized that often I put up with a problem for years because
I never examined the nature of the problem and how it might
be solved. It turns out that stating a problem clearly often
suggests its solution. For instance, I hated hanging up my
coat, so I usually left it slung on the back of a chair.
Identify the problem: “Why don’t I ever hang up my coat?”
Answer: “I don’t like fussing with hangers.”
Solution: “So use the hook on the inside of the door!”

When I asked myself, “What’s the problem with all these
little toys?” I answered, “Eliza and Eleanor want to keep this
stuff, but we don’t have a place to put it away.” Bingo. I
immediately saw the solution to my problem. The next day, I
stopped by the Container Store and bought five large glass
canisters. I combed the apartment to collect toy flotsam and
stuffed it in. Clutter cured! I filled all five jars. What I hadn’t
anticipated was that the jars looked great on the shelf—
colorful, festive, and inviting. My solution was ornamental as
well as practical.
A pleasant, unintended consequence of my clutter
clearing was that it solved the “four-thermometer
syndrome”: I could never find our thermometer, so I kept
buying new ones, and when my clutter clearing flushed them
all out, we had four thermometers. (Which I never used, by
the way; I felt the back of the girls’ necks to see if they had a
fever.) It’s a Secret of Adulthood: if you can’t find
something, clean up. I discovered that although it seemed
easier to put things away in general areas—the coat closet,
any kitchen drawer—it was more satisfying when each item
went in a highly specific location. One of life’s small
pleasures is to return something to its proper place; putting
the shoe polish on the second shelf in the linen closet gave
me the archer’s satisfaction of hitting a mark.
I also hit on a few daily rules to help keep the apartment
from constantly falling into disorder. First, following my
Fourth Commandment, “Do it now,” I started to apply the
“one-minute rule” I didn’t postpone any task that could be
done in less than one minute. I put away my umbrella; I filed

a document; I put the newspapers in the recycling bin; I
closed the cabinet door. These steps took just a few
moments, but the cumulative impact was impressive.
Along with the “one-minute rule,” I observed the “evening
tidy-up” by taking ten minutes before bed to do simple
tidying. Tidying up at night made our mornings more serene
and pleasant and, in an added benefit, helped prepare me
for sleep. Putting things in order is very calming, and doing
something physical makes me aware of being tired. If I’ve
been reading under the covers for an hour before turning
out the light, I don’t get the same feeling of luxurious comfort
when I stretch out in bed.
As the clutter behind closed doors and cabinets began to
diminish, I attacked visual clutter. For instance, we
subscribe to a huge number of magazines, and we couldn’t
keep them neat. I cleared out a drawer, and now we keep
magazines stacked out of sight, ready to grab before we
head to the gym. I’d been keeping invitations, school
notices, and various miscellanea posted on a bulletin
board, but I pulled it all down and moved it into a file labeled
“Upcoming events and invitations.” I was no more or less
organized than before, but our visual chaos dropped.
I’d dreaded doing the clutter clearing, because it seemed
like such an enormous job, and it was an enormous job, but
every time I looked around and saw the extra space and
order, I registered a little jolt of energy. I was thrilled with the
improved conditions in our apartment, and I kept waiting for
Jamie to say, “Boy, everything looks terrific! You’ve done
so much work, it’s so much nicer!” But he never did. I love

my gold stars, so that was disappointing, but on the other
hand, he didn’t complain about lugging five hundred pounds
of stuff to the thrift store. And even if he didn’t appreciate
my efforts as much I’d expected, it didn’t really matter; I felt
uplifted and restored by my clutter clearing.
TACKLE A NAGGING TASK.
Unfinished tasks were draining my energy and making me
feel guilty. I felt like a bad friend because I hadn’t bought a
wedding gift. I felt like an irresponsible family member
because I’d never gotten a skin cancer check (and I have
the superfair skin that comes with red hair). I felt like a bad
parent because our toddler, Eleanor, needed new shoes. I
had an image of myself sitting in front of a hive-shaped
laptop, while reminders in the form of bees dive-bombed
my head, buzzing, “Do me!” “Do me!” while I slapped them
away. It was time for some relief.
I sat down and wrote a five-page to-do list. Writing the list
was sort of fun, but then I had to face the prospect of doing
tasks that I’d been avoiding—in some cases, for years. For
the sake of morale, I added several items that could be
crossed off with five minutes of effort.
Over the next several weeks, I doggedly tackled my list. I
had my first skin cancer check. I got the windows cleaned. I
got a backup system for my computer. I figured out a
mystery cable bill. I took my shoes to be reheeled.
As I grappled with some of the more difficult items on the

to-do list, though, I faced a discouraging number of
“boomerang errands”: errands that I thought I was getting
rid of but then came right back to me. Eighteen months
overdue, congratulating myself on crossing the task off the
list, I went to the dentist to get my teeth cleaned, only to
discover that I had decay under one filling. I had to return to
the dentist the next week. Boomerang. After months of
procrastination, I asked the building super to fix our
bedroom wall light, but it turned out he couldn’t do it. He
gave me the number of an electrician. I called the
electrician; he came, he took the light off the wall, but he
couldn’t fix it. He told me about a repair shop. I took the light
to the repair shop. A week later, I picked it up. Then the
electrician had to come back to install it. Then the light
worked again. Boomerang, boomerang, boomerang.
I had to accept the fact that some nagging tasks would
never be crossed off my list. I would have to do them every
day for the rest of my life. Finally I started wearing
sunscreen every day—well, most days. Finally I started
flossing every day—well, most days. (Although I knew that
sun exposure can lead to cancer and unhealthy gums can
lead to tooth loss, focusing on wrinkles and bad breath
proved to be more motivating considerations.)
Sometimes, though, the most difficult part of doing a task
was just deciding to do it. I began one morning by sending
an e-mail that included only forty-eight words and took fortyfive seconds to write—yet it had been weighing on my mind
for at least two weeks. Such unfinished tasks were
disproportionately draining.

An important aspect of happiness is managing your
moods, and studies show that one of the best ways to lift
your mood is to engineer an easy success, such as tackling
a long-delayed chore. I was astounded by the dramatic
boost in my mental energy that came from taking care of
these neglected tasks.
ACT MORE ENERGETIC.
To feel more energetic, I applied one of my Twelve
Commandments: “Act the way I want to feel.” This
commandment sums up one of the most helpful insights
that I’d learned in my happiness research: although we
presume that we act because of the way we feel, in fact we
often feel because of the way we act. For example, studies
show that even an artificially induced smile brings about
happier emotions, and one experiment suggested that
people who use Botox are less prone to anger, because
they can’t make angry faces. The philosopher and
psychologist William James explained, “Action seems to
follow feeling, but really action and feeling go together; and
by regulating the action, which is under the more direct
control of the will, we can indirectly regulate the feeling,
which is not.” Advice from every quarter, ancient and
contemporary, backs up the observation that to change our
feelings, we should change our actions.
Although a “fake it till you feel it” strategy sounded hokey,
I found it extremely effective. When I felt draggy, I started to

act with more energy. I sped up my walk. I paced while
talking on the phone. I put more warmth and zest into my
voice. Sometimes I feel exhausted by the prospect of
spending time with my own children, but one tired
afternoon, instead of trying to devise a game that involved
my lying on the couch (I’ve managed to be astonishingly
resourceful in coming up with ideas), I bounded into the
room and said, “Hey, let’s play in the tent!” It really worked; I
did manage to give myself an energy boost by acting with
energy.
By the end of January, I was off to a promising start, but did
I feel happier? It was too soon to tell. I did feel more alert
and calm, and although I still had periods when I felt
overtaxed, they became less frequent.
I found that rewarding myself for good behavior—even
when that reward was nothing more than a check mark that
I gave myself on my Resolutions Chart—made it easier for
me to stick to a resolution. Getting a bit of reinforcement
did make a difference. I could see, however, that I’d have to
remind myself continually to keep my resolutions. In
particular, I noticed a decline in my order-maintaining zeal
by the end of the month. I loved the big payoff of cleaning
out a closet, but keeping the apartment tidy was a
Sisyphean task that never stayed finished. Perhaps the
“one-minute rule” and the “evening tidy-up” would keep me
attacking clutter regularly, in small doses, so that it couldn’t
grow to its previous crushing proportions.

Nevertheless, I was astonished by the charge of energy
and satisfaction I got from creating order. The closet that
had been an eyesore was now a joy; the stack of papers
slowly yellowing on the edge of my desk was gone. “It is by
studying little things,” wrote Samuel Johnson, “that we
attain the great art of having as little misery, and as much
happiness as possible.”

2
FEBRUARY
Remember Love

MARRIAGE

Quit nagging.
Don’t expect praise or appreciation.
Fight right.
No dumping.
Give proofs of love.

One

alarming fact jumps out from the research about
happiness and marriage: marital satisfaction drops
substantially after the first child arrives. The disruptive
presence of new babies and teenagers, in particular, puts a
lot of pressure on marriages, and discontent spikes when
children are in these stages.
Jamie and I had been married for eleven years, and sure
enough, the incidence of low-level bickering in our marriage
increased significantly after our daughter Eliza was born.
Until then, the phrase “Can’t you do it?” had never crossed
my lips. Over the last several years, I’d started doing too
much complaining, nagging, and foot-dragging. It was time

to do something about that.
As corny as it sounds, I’ve always felt that from the
moment we were introduced in the library during law
school, when I was a first-year and he was a second-year,
Jamie and I have had an extraordinary love (the rosecolored pile jacket he was wearing that afternoon still hangs
at the back of my closet). In recent years, though, I’d begun
to worry that an accumulation of minor irritations and sharp
words was making us less outwardly loving.
Our marriage wasn’t in trouble. We showed our affection
openly and often. We were indulgent with each other. We
handled conflict pretty well. We didn’t practice the
behaviors that the marriage expert John Gottman calls the
“Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse” for their destructive
role in relationships: stonewalling, defensiveness, criticism,
and contempt. Well, sometimes we indulged in
stonewalling, defensiveness, and criticism, but never
contempt, the worst behavior of all.
But we—I—had fallen into some bad habits that I wanted
to change.
Working on my marriage was an obvious goal for my
happiness project, because a good marriage is one of the
factors most strongly associated with happiness. Partly this
reflects the fact that happy people find it easier to get and
stay married than unhappy people do, because happy
people make better dates and easier spouses. But
marriage itself also brings happiness, because it provides
the support and companionship that everyone needs.

For me, as for most married people, my marriage was
the foundation of all the other important choices in my life:
where I lived, having kids, my friends, my work, my leisure.
The atmosphere of my marriage set the weather for my
whole life. That’s why I’d decided not only to include
marriage in my happiness project but also to tackle it early,
in the second month.
Yet though my relationship with Jamie was the most
important factor in shaping my daily existence, it was also,
unfortunately, the relationship in which I was most likely to
behave badly. Too often I focused on gripes and disputes,
and I did quite a bit of blaming. If the lightbulbs were burned
out, if I was feeling plagued by a messy apartment, or even
if I felt discouraged about my work, I blamed Jamie.
Jamie is a funny mix. He has a sardonic side that can
make him seem distant and almost harsh to people who
don’t know him well, but he’s also very tender-hearted. (A
good example: he loves movies that I find unbearably dark,
such as Open Water and Reservoir Dogs, but he also
loves sweet, sentimental movies—his favorite is Say
Anything.) He drives me crazy by refusing to carry out
various husbandly assignments, then surprises me by
upgrading my computer without my asking. He makes the
bed but never uses the clothes hamper. He’s bad at buying
presents for birthdays, but he brings home lovely gifts
unexpectedly. Like everyone, he’s a combination of good
and not-so-good qualities, and the worst of my bad habits
was to focus on his faults while taking his virtues for
granted.

I had come to understand one critical fact about my
happiness project: I couldn’t change anyone else. As
tempting as it was to try, I couldn’t lighten the atmosphere of
our marriage by bullying Jamie into changing his ways. I
could work only on myself. For inspiration, I turned to the
twelfth of my Twelve Commandments: “There is only love.”
A friend of mine was the source of that commandment.
She came up with the phrase when she was considering
taking a high-pressure job where she’d be working for a
notoriously difficult person. The person handling the hiring
process told her, “I’m going to be honest with you. John
Doe is very effective, but he’s an extremely tough guy to
work for. Think hard about whether you want this job.” My
friend really wanted the job, so she decided, “There is only
love.” From that moment on, she refused to think critical
thoughts about John Doe; she never complained about him
behind his back; she wouldn’t even listen to other people
criticize him.
“Don’t your coworkers think you’re a goody-goody?” I
asked.
“Oh, no,” she said. “They all wish they could do the same
thing, too. He drives them crazy, but I can honestly say that I
like John.”
If my friend could do that for her boss, why couldn’t I do it
for Jamie? Deep down, I had only love for Jamie—but I was
allowing too many petty issues to get in the way. I wasn’t
living up to my own standards of behavior, and then,
because I felt guilty when I behaved badly, I behaved even

worse.
Love is a funny thing. I’d donate a kidney to Jamie
without a moment’s hesitation, but I was intensely annoyed
if he asked me to make a special stop at the drugstore to
pick up shaving cream. Studies show that the most
common sources of conflict among couples are money,
work, sex, communication, religion, children, in-laws,
appreciation, and leisure activities. Having a newborn is
also particularly tough. However, these categories—as
seemingly all-inclusive as they were—didn’t quite capture
my problem areas. I thought hard about my particular
marriage, and the changes I could make to restore the
tenderness and patience of our newlywed, prebaby days.
First, I needed to change my approach to household
work. I was spending too much time handing out
assignments and nagging, and not only was I nagging
Jamie to do his work, I was nagging him to give me praise
for my work. Also, I wanted to become more lighthearted,
especially in moments of anger. A line by G. K. Chesterton
echoed in my head: “It is easy to be heavy: hard to be light”
(or, as the saying goes, “Dying is easy; comedy is hard”).
And I wanted to stop taking Jamie for granted. Small,
frequent gestures of thoughtfulness were more important
than flowers on Valentine’s Day, and I wanted to load
Jamie with small treats and courtesies, praise and
appreciation—after all, as my Secret of Adulthood holds,
“What you do every day matters more than what you do
once in a while.”
Jamie didn’t ask me what experiments I’d planned for the

month, and I didn’t tell him. I knew him well enough to know
that although he realized that, in some ways, he was my lab
rat, hearing about the details would make him feel selfconscious.
These resolutions were going to be tough for me—I knew
that. I wasn’t unrealistic enough to expect to be able to
keep every resolution, every day, but I wanted to aim higher
than I had. One reason I started my happiness project by
raising my energy and clearing my clutter was that I knew I’d
be more able to act lighthearted and loving if I didn’t feel
overwhelmed by mental or physical disorder. It seemed
ridiculous, but already, having a tidier closet and getting
more sleep was putting me into a happier and more
peaceable frame of mind. The challenge would be to keep
up with January’s resolutions now that I was adding a new
list of resolutions for February.
QUIT NAGGING.
Jamie hated being nagged, and I hated being a nag, yet I
found myself doing it all too often. Studies show that the
quality of a couple’s friendship determines, in large part,
whether they feel satisfied with their marriage’s romance
and passion, and nothing kills the feeling of friendship (and
passion) more than nagging. Anyway, nagging doesn’t
work.
Our Valentine’s cards gave me a chance to put this
resolution to a test. As happens to many people, about five

minutes after Eliza was born, I was possessed with an
irresistible urge to send out yearly holiday cards. In a
decision born more out of desperation rather than
originality, I’d decided to make a tradition of sending cards
in February for Valentine’s Day, instead of in December,
when life is crazy.
When it was time to send out the cards this year, as
Jamie and I sat down to watch Close Encounters of the
Third Kind, I got out the enormous stacks of envelopes and
asked brightly, “Would you like to stuff or seal?”
He gave me a sad look and said, “Please don’t make
me.”
I struggled to decide how to answer. Should I insist that
he help? Should I tell him that it wasn’t fair that I had to do
all the work? That I’d done the hard part of ordering the
cards and arranging for the photo (an adorable picture of
Eleanor and Eliza in ballet clothes), and he was just helping
with the easy part? On the other hand, I’d decided to do
these cards to suit myself. Was it fair to ask him to help?
Well, fairness didn’t really matter. I’d rather finish the
envelopes myself than feel like a nag.
“It’s okay,” I told him with a sigh. “Don’t worry about it.” I
did feel a few twinges of resentment when I glanced at
Jamie lounging back on the sofa, but I realized that I
enjoyed not feeling like a nag more than I enjoyed watching
TV without licking envelopes at the same time.
After the movie, Jamie looked over at me, where I sat
surrounded by stuffed, sealed, and stamped red envelopes.
He put his hand on mine. “Will you be my Valentine?”

I was glad that I’d decided not to push it.
To make it easier to quit nagging, I made myself a
checklist of antinagging techniques. First, because it’s
annoying to hear a hectoring voice, I found ways for us to
suggest tasks without talking; when I put an envelope on the
floor by the front door, Jamie knew he was supposed to
mail it on his way to work. I limited myself to a one-word
reminder. Instead of barking out, “Now remember, you
promised to figure out what’s wrong with the video camera
before we go to the park!” I just said, “Camera!” as Jamie
got up from lunch. I reminded myself that tasks didn’t need
to be done according to my schedule. I had to fight the urge
to nag Jamie to retrieve the play slide from our basement
storage, because once I decided Eleanor would enjoy it, I
wanted it brought up immediately. But it wasn’t really
urgent. I did give myself credit for not indulging in the
popular “It’s for your own good” variety of nagging. I never
bugged Jamie about taking an umbrella, eating breakfast,
or going to the dentist. Although some people think that that
kind of nagging shows love, I think that an adult should be
able to decide whether or not to wear a sweater without
interference from others.
The most obvious (and least appealing) antinagging
technique, of course, was to do a task myself. Why did I get
to decree that it was Jamie’s responsibility to make sure
we had plenty of cash on hand? Once I took over the job,
we always had cash, and I was much happier. And when
Jamie did a task, I didn’t allow myself to carp from the
sidelines. I thought he paid too much when he bought the

replacement for the dud video camera, but it was his
decision to make in his own way.
I also tried to be more observant and appreciative of all
the tasks that Jamie did. I was certainly guilty of
“unconscious overclaiming,” the phenomenon in which we
unconsciously overestimate our contributions or skills
relative to other people. (It’s related to the Garrison Keillor–
named “Lake Wobegon fallacy,” which describes the fact
that we all fancy ourselves to be above average.) In one
study, when students in a work group each estimated their
contribution to the team, the total was 139 percent. This
makes sense, because we’re far more aware of what we
do than what other people do: I complain about the time I
spend paying bills, but I overlook the time Jamie spends
dealing with our car.
I have a friend who has a radical solution. She and her
husband don’t assign. Even though they have four children,
they have a tacit agreement never to say things such as
“You need to take the kids to the birthday party” or “Fix the
toilet, it’s running again.” Their system works because they
both pitch in, but even so, I can’t imagine living that way. It’s
an impossible ideal, yet inspiring.
DON’T EXPECT PRAISE OR APPRECIATION.
My examination of my nagging habit showed me that I also
engaged in a more subtle form of nagging—nagging that
concerned work that I did. I nagged Jamie to give me more

praise.
With something like the Valentine’s cards project, I
realized that what I really wanted—even more than help—
was for Jamie to say something such as “Wow, the
photograph of the girls is terrific! You’re doing a great job
with these Valentine’s cards!” I wanted that gold star stuck
onto my homework.
Why did I have such a need for gold stars? Was it vanity
that needed to be stoked? Was it insecurity that needed to
be soothed? Whatever the reason, I knew I should get over
my need for Jamie to applaud the nice things I did, and,
even more, I should get over my need for Jamie even to
notice the nice things I did. So I made the resolution “Don’t
expect praise or appreciation.”
Until I started paying close attention, I hadn’t appreciated
how much this need affected my behavior. One morning, I
staggered into the kitchen in my robe around 7:30 A.M. I’d
been up for much of the night with Eleanor, who had hardly
slept; Jamie had got up with her around 6:00 so I could go
back to bed.
“Good morning,” I mumbled as I cracked open a Diet
Coke. I didn’t add any words of thanks for my luxurious
extra ninety minutes of sleep.
Jamie waited a moment, then prompted, “I hope you
appreciate that I bought you some time this morning.” He
needs gold stars himself, even though he isn’t very good—
to my mind—at handing them out.
I’d been concentrating about behaving better in my
marriage. I’d been patting myself on the back for learning

so much. So did I say in a tender voice, “Of course I
appreciate it, thanks so much, you’re my hero”? Did I give
Jamie a big hug of gratitude? Nope. Because Jamie
neglected to give me a gold star for staying up with
Eleanor, I snapped, “I did appreciate it, but you never show
any appreciation when I let you sleep. Then you expect a lot
of gratitude when you let me sleep.” Jamie’s look made me
wish I’d reacted differently. I remembered my Ninth
Commandment: “Lighten up.”
I put my arms around him. “I’m sorry. Really. I shouldn’t
have talked that way, and I do appreciate getting the extra
sleep this morning.”
“You know,” he said, “I really was trying to give you a
treat. And I do appreciate the fact that you let me sleep.”
“Okay.”
We hugged—for at least six seconds, which, I happened
to know from my research, is the minimum time necessary
to promote the flow of oxytocin and serotonin, moodboosting chemicals that promote bonding. The moment of
tension passed.
This exchange led me to an important insight into how to
manage myself better. I’d been self-righteously telling
myself that I did certain chores or made certain efforts “for
Jamie” or “for the team.” Though this sounded generous, it
led to a bad result, because I sulked when Jamie didn’t
appreciate my efforts. Instead, I started to tell myself, “I’m
doing this for myself. This is what I want.” I wanted to send
out Valentine’s cards. I wanted to clean out the kitchen

cabinets. This sounded selfish, but in fact, it was less
selfish, because it meant I wasn’t nagging to get a gold star
from Jamie or anyone else. No one else even had to notice
what I’d done.
I remember talking to a friend whose parents had been
very involved in the civil rights movement. “They always
said,” he told me, “that you have to do that kind of work for
yourself. If you do it for other people, you end up wanting
them to acknowledge it and to be grateful and to give you
credit. If you do it for yourself, you don’t expect other people
to react in a particular way.” I think that’s right.
Nevertheless, for all my talk of giving up gold stars, I have
to admit that I still thought it would be nice for Jamie to hand
them out a bit more lavishly. Whether or not I should want
them, I do.
FIGHT RIGHT.
Nagging was easier to address than some other behaviors
I was trying to change. I faced a tougher challenge with my
second priority: lightening my attitude. Marital conflicts fall
into two categories: issues that can be clearly resolved and
those that can’t. Unfortunately, more conflicts fall into the
open-ended “How should we spend our money?” and “How
should we raise our children?” categories than into the
easier “What movie should we see this weekend?” or
“Where should we go on our vacation this summer?”
category.

Some disagreement is inevitable and even valuable.
Since Jamie and I were going to fight, I wanted to be able
to have fights that were more fun, where we could joke
around and be affectionate even while we were
disagreeing.
I also wanted to conquer my own particular bosom
enemy: snapping. Far too often, in a kind of one-sided
minifight, I would lash out in sudden fits of temper that
soured the household mood. I’d often wondered why anger
—along with pride, greed, gluttony, lust, sloth, and envy—
were the seven deadly sins, because they didn’t seem as
deadly as lots of other sins. It turns out that they’re deadly
sins not because of their gravity but because of their power
to generate other, worse sins. They’re the gateway sins to
the big sins. Of the seven deadly sins, anger was certainly
my nemesis.
Fighting style is very important to the health of a
marriage; Gottman’s “love laboratory” research shows that
how a couple fights matters more than how much they fight.
Couples who fight right tackle only one difficult topic at a
time, instead of indulging in arguments that cover every
grievance since the first date. These couples ease into
arguments instead of blowing up immediately—and avoid
bombs such as “You never…” and “You always…” They
know how to bring an argument to an end, instead of
keeping it going for hours. They make “repair attempts” by
using words or actions to keep bad feelings from
escalating. They recognize other pressures imposed on a
spouse—a husband acknowledges that his wife feels

overwhelmed by the demands of work and home; a wife
acknowledges that her husband feels caught between her
and his mother.
Here’s an example of how not to fight right. Apparently,
much as I hate to acknowledge it, I may snore from time to
time. I hate to hear any mention of it, because snoring
sounds so unattractive, but when Jamie joked about it one
morning, I was trying to “be light,” so I laughed along with
him.
Then, a few weeks later, as we were listening to our
favorite all-news radio station before the 6:30 alarm rang
and I was reflecting groggily on how much more peaceful
our bedroom was now that I’d cleared away so much mess,
Jamie said in a sweet, kidding-around way, “I’ll start the day
with two observations. First, you snore.”
I snapped. “So that’s the first thing I have to hear in the
morning?” I exploded. I practically threw the covers in his
face as I got out of bed. “That I snore. Can you think of
nothing nicer to say?” I stormed across the room and
started yanking clothes out of the closet. “If you want me to
stop, give me a poke while I’m sleeping, but don’t keep
harping on it!”
Lesson learned? By laughing along with him, I’d made
Jamie think that snoring was a good subject for a joke. I
tried to be light, but I couldn’t; I wish I could always laugh at
myself easily, but in some situations, I can’t, and I should
have responded honestly, so I could avoid an eventual
blowup. Jamie had had no warning that his comment was

going to enrage me. So much for “Fight right.” This time, I
hadn’t managed to keep my resolution—I couldn’t even
bring myself to apologize, I just wanted to forget about it—
but next time, I’d do better (I hoped).
In marriage, it’s less important to have many pleasant
experiences than it is to have fewer unpleasant
experiences, because people have a “negativity bias” our
reactions to bad events are faster, stronger, and stickier
than our reactions to good events. In fact, in practically
every language, there are more concepts to describe
negative emotions than positive emotions.
It takes at least five positive marital actions to offset one
critical or destructive action, so one way to strengthen a
marriage is to make sure that the positive far outweighs the
negative. When a couple’s interactions are usually loving
and kind, it’s much easier to disregard the occasional
unpleasant exchange. I had a feeling, however, that it would
take more than five marital actions, on both our parts, to
offset the negative force of our snoring exchange.
Fighting right made a big difference to my happiness,
because the failure to fight right was a significant source of
guilt in my life. As Mark Twain observed, “An uneasy
conscience is a hair in the mouth.” When Jamie did
something annoying and I snapped at him, and then I felt
bad about snapping, I blamed it on him. But in fact, I
realized, a major cause of my bad feelings wasn’t Jamie’s
behavior but rather my guilt about my reaction to his

behavior; fighting right eliminated that guilt and so made
me happier.
One day when I repeatedly failed to fight right helped me
to see this point clearly. For Presidents Day weekend, we
went on a little vacation with Jamie’s parents. My in-laws,
Judy and Bob, are wonderful grandparents with whom to
vacation—helpful, easygoing, with a reasonable tolerance
for chaos—but they like to have plenty of time when
traveling, and in our rush to get out the door to meet them, I
let myself get too hungry. Just as we were leaving the
apartment, I realized I was famished, and I gave myself a
quick fix by digging into an enormous heart-shaped box of
M&M’s that Eliza had gotten for Valentine’s Day.
Eating all that candy made me feel guilty and a little sick,
and I couldn’t keep from making nasty remarks. The worse I
behaved, the guiltier I felt, and that made me behave worse.
“Jamie, please get those papers out of my way.”
“Eliza, stop leaning on me, you’re hurting my arm.”
“Jamie, can’t you get that bag?”
Even after we arrived at the hotel, having made a wrong
start, I couldn’t shake my bad feelings.
“Are you okay?” Jamie asked me at one point.
“Sure, I’m fine,” I mumbled, temporarily chastened, but
my bad mood soon reasserted itself.
That night, after Eliza and Eleanor went to sleep, the
adults could finally have a sustained conversation. We
drank our after-dinner coffee (even after years as part of
this family, I still marvel at Judy’s and Bob’s ability to drink
espresso with caffeine after dinner) and talked about a

recent New York Times article about VX-950, a hepatitis C
drug in trials.
We cared a lot about those trials. Jamie jokes about
being a “broken toy” with his bad knee, his impressive scar
from childhood surgery, and occasional back spasms, but
his major broken part is his liver. He has hepatitis C.
As chronic and potentially fatal conditions go, hepatitis C
has some good points. It’s not contagious except through
direct blood contact. Jamie has no apparent symptoms and
found out that he has hepatitis C only through a blood test.
One day he’ll develop cirrhosis and his liver will stop
functioning and he’ll be in very big trouble, but for now, he’s
perfectly fine. Also, when it comes to health problems,
misery loves company; if a lot of people share your ailment,
drug companies work hard to find a cure. About 3 million
people in the United States have hepatitis C, along with
170 million or so worldwide, so it’s an active area of
research, and Jamie’s doctors estimate that new, effective
treatments are likely to be approved within five to eight
years. Hepatitis C has a very long course—of the people
who develop cirrhosis, most don’t get it for twenty or thirty
years.
Thirty years sounds like a very long time, but Jamie
picked up hepatitis C through a blood transfusion during a
heart operation when he was eight years old, before
screening for hepatitis C began. And now he’s thirty-eight.
The one treatment now available, pegylated interferon
plus ribavirin, didn’t work for Jamie, despite an unpleasant
year of flulike symptoms, pills, and weekly shots. Now we

just have to hope that Jamie manages to hang on to his
liver until researchers find new treatments. In addition to
cirrhosis leading to liver failure, itself not an attractive
prospect, hepatitis C also makes liver cancer far more
likely. Thank goodness for liver transplants—though a
transplanted liver is no picnic and, scarily, not always
possible to get. (Like the old joke about the restaurant: “The
food is terrible!” “Yes, and the portions are so small.”)
So we were all very interested in the Times piece’s
description of possible new treatments. My father-in-law,
Bob, found the article encouraging, but every time he made
a comment, I countered it.
“According to the article, the research is very promising,”
he said.
“But both of Jamie’s liver doctors told us that it’s going to
be at least five years, if not more, for a drug to be
approved,” I answered.
“The article suggests that they’re making great strides,”
he answered mildly. Bob never becomes argumentative.
“But they’re still a very long way from getting it on the
market.” I often become argumentative.
“This field of research is enormously active.”
“But the time horizon is very long.”
Etc., etc., etc.
It’s not often that I find myself telling Bob that he’s being
overly optimistic. He emphasizes the importance of
rational, probabilistic decision making, and he practices
this discipline himself, with yellow notepads with “pros” and
“cons” columns, a habit of gathering multiple viewpoints, a

detached “Markets go up, markets go down” outlook. In this
situation, however, he chose to take an optimistic view of
the evidence. Why argue with him? I didn’t agree with his
view, but I’m no doctor, what did I know?
My new aspirations for my behavior were high but not
unreasonable. I knew that my combativeness and pedantry
in this conversation came not from petty irritation but from a
desire to protect myself against false hopes. Bob was
taking the positive route, and I would have felt better if I’d let
the issue go without arguing. I’m sure I made Bob, and
certainly Jamie, feel worse by saying discouraging things,
and being quarrelsome just made me feel bad. Fight right
—not just with your husband but with everyone.
On a less lofty note, I also learned not to eat half a pound
of M&M’s on an empty stomach.
NO DUMPING.
For my research on learning how to “Fight right,” I had
acquired an extensive library of books on marriage and
relationships.
“Anyone who looks at our shelves is going to think that
our marriage is in trouble,” Jamie observed.
“Why’s that?” I asked, startled.
“Look what you’ve got here. The Seven Principles for
Making Marriage Work. Love Is Never Enough.
Babyproofing Your Marriage. Uncoupling. One Man, Hurt.
I’d be worried myself if I didn’t know what you were working

on.”
“But this material is great,” I said. “There’s so much
fascinating research.”
“Sure, but people don’t bother to read these books
unless they have issues.”
Maybe Jamie was right, but I was happy that I’d had a
reason to study the latest findings about marriage and
relationships. I’d learned a lot. For example, there’s an
intriguing difference in how men and women approach
intimacy. Although men and women agree that sharing
activities and self-disclosure are important, women’s idea
of an intimate moment is a face-to-face conversation, while
men feel close when they work or play sitting alongside
someone.
So when Jamie asked, “Do you want to watch The
Shield?” I understood that in his eyes, watching TV
together counted as true quality time, not we’re-just-sittingin-a-room-watching-TV-not-talking-to-each-other time.
“Great idea!” I answered. And, as it turned out, while lying
in bed watching a TV show about a rogue cop in L.A. didn’t
sound very romantic, it felt romantic once we were cozily
settled in against the pillows.
Perhaps because men have this low standard for what
qualifies as intimacy, both men and women find
relationships with women to be more intimate and
enjoyable than those with men. Women have more feelings
of empathy for other people than men do (though women
and men have about the same degree of empathy for

animals, whatever that means). In fact, for both men and
women—and this finding struck me as highly significant—
the most reliable predictor of not being lonely is the amount
of contact with women. Time spent with men doesn’t make
a difference.
Learning about this research made a difference in my
attitude toward Jamie. I love him with all my heart, and I
know he loves me, and I know that I can absolutely trust and
confide in him, yet I often felt frustrated because he never
wanted to have long heart-to-heart discussions. In
particular, I wished that he would take more interest in my
work. My sister, Elizabeth, is a TV writer, and I envy her
having her writing partner, Sarah. Practically daily, she and
Sarah have marathon conversations about their writing and
career strategies. I don’t have a partner or any colleagues
with whom to discuss work issues, so I wanted Jamie to fill
that role for me.
Also, I expected to be able to dump all my insecurities
into Jamie’s lap. I’d start conversations with enticing
openers such as “I’m worried that I’m not living up to my
potential” or “I’m doing a bad job of networking” or “What if
my writing is no good?” Jamie, remarkably, didn’t want to
have these conversations, and that made me angry. I
wanted him to help me work through my feelings of anxiety
and self-doubt.
Learning that men and women both turn to women for
understanding showed me that Jamie wasn’t ignoring me
out of lack of interest or affection; he just wasn’t good at
giving that kind of support. Jamie wasn’t going to have a

long discussion about whether I should start a blog or how I
should structure my book. He didn’t want to spend hours
pumping up my self-confidence. He was never going to play
the role of a female writing partner, and it wasn’t realistic to
expect him to do it. If I needed that kind of support, I should
figure out another way to get it. My realization didn’t change
his behavior—but I stopped feeling so resentful.
I’d also noticed that the more upset I felt, the less Jamie
seemed to want to talk about it.
“You know,” I said to him one night, “I’m feeling anxious. I
wish you’d try to help me feel better. The worse I feel, the
less you seem to want to talk to me.”
“I just can’t stand to see you unhappy,” he answered.
Light again dawned. It wasn’t perversity that kept Jamie
from being a sympathetic listener; not only was he
constitutionally less oriented to having long heart-to-heart
conversations, he also tried to avoid any topic that got me
upset, because he found it so painful to see me feeling
blue. Now, that didn’t let him off the hook altogether—
sometimes I needed a sympathetic listener, even if he
didn’t feel like playing that role—but at least I understood
his perspective.
Our conversation started me thinking about how my
happiness affected Jamie and others. I’d heard the
aphorism “Happy wife, happy life” or, put another way, “If
Mama ain’t happy, ain’t nobody happy.” At first I’d thought
that sounded great—yippee, it’s all about pleasing me!—
but if these sayings are true, it’s a tremendous
responsibility.

I’d wondered whether my happiness project was selfish,
because it seemed self-indulgent to concentrate on my own
happiness. True, I do make other people happy when I tend
to my own happiness—I was trying not to snap at Jamie
and to laugh at his jokes. But it went beyond that. By being
happy myself, I was better able to try to make other people
happier.
Happy people generally are more forgiving, helpful, and
charitable, have better self-control, and are more tolerant of
frustration than unhappy people, while unhappy people are
more often withdrawn, defensive, antagonistic, and selfabsorbed. Oscar Wilde observed, “One is not always
happy when one is good; but one is always good when one
is happy.”
Happiness has a particularly strong influence in
marriage, because spouses pick up each other’s moods
so easily. A 30 percent increase in one spouse’s
happiness boosts the other spouse’s happiness, while a
drop in one spouse’s happiness drags the other down. (Not
only that: I was fascinated to learn that in a phenomenon
known as “health concordance,” partners’ health behaviors
tend to merge, as they pick up good or bad habits from
each other related to eating, exercising, visiting doctors,
smoking, and drinking.)
I know that Jamie wants me to be happy. In fact, the
happier I seem to be, the more Jamie tries to make me
happy, and when I’m unhappy—for whatever reason—
Jamie goes into a funk. So, as part of my attempt to be
happy, I resolved, “No dumping,” especially on Jamie. I

would bring up my worries if I really needed Jamie’s
counsel or support, but I wouldn’t dump my minor troubles
on him.
I had an opportunity to live up to my resolution one
Sunday morning. It was a rare moment of calm. Jamie was
cleaning up the mess he’d created while whipping up
pancakes, Eliza was absorbed in Harry Potter and the
Goblet of Fire, Eleanor was covering every page of a
Scooby-Doo coloring book with green crayon, and I was
going through the mail. I opened an innocent-looking letter
from our credit card company to discover that because of a
security breach on its end, our main credit card had been
canceled, and we’d been issued a new card and number.
I was furious. Now I’d have to go into every account that
relied on that credit card number to update it. I hadn’t kept a
list, so I had no idea how I was going to figure out which
accounts needed to be changed. Our automatic toll pass,
our Amazon account, my gym membership…what else?
The statement was so matter-of-fact too; no apology, no
little perk to acknowledge the corporate fault or the
inconvenience to cardholders. This was the kind of chore
that made me crazy: it took up precious time and mental
energy, yet when it was done, I was no better off than
before I started it.
“I can’t believe this!” I fumed to Jamie. “They’ve canceled
our credit card because of their mistake!” I was prepared
to launch into a full diatribe when the thought flashed
through my mind: “No dumping.” I paused. Why should I

spoil a peaceful moment with my irritation? Hearing
someone complain is tiresome whether you’re in a good
mood or a bad one and whether or not the complaining is
justified. I took a deep breath and stopped in mid-rant. “Oh,
well” was all I said, in a tone of forced calm.
Jamie looked at me with surprise, then relief. He
probably knew what an effort it had taken for me to restrain
myself. When I got up to get more coffee, he stood up to
give me a hug, without saying anything.
GIVE PROOFS OF LOVE.
I’ve never forgotten something I read in college, by Pierre
Reverdy: “There is no love; there are only proofs of love.”
Whatever love I might feel in my heart, others will see only
my actions.
When I looked back at my Resolutions Chart, I could see
that some entries, such as “Toss, restore, organize”
boasted a row of cheerful check marks, while other
resolutions were dotted with X marks. I was doing a lot
better with “Go to sleep earlier” than with “Don’t expect
praise or appreciation.” Fortunately, “Give proofs of love”
seemed like the kind of action that could easily become a
pleasant habit.
Some ways of showing my love were easy. Because
people are 47 percent (how do they come up with these
statistics?) more apt to feel close to a family member who
often expresses affection than to one who rarely does, I

started telling Jamie “I love you” at every turn and putting
“ILY” at the end of my e-mails. I also started hugging Jamie
more—as well as other people in my life. Hugging relieves
stress, boosts feelings of closeness, and even squelches
pain. In one study, people assigned to give five hugs each
day for a month, aiming to hug as many different people as
they could, became happier.
Some things I was already doing right. Because I didn’t
want every one of my e-mails to Jamie to contain some
irksome question or reminder, I’d gotten into the habit of
sending him enjoyable messages, with interesting news or
funny stories about the girls.
One day when I walked by Jamie’s office building in
midtown on my way to a meeting, I stopped to call him on
my cell phone.
“Are you at your desk?” I asked.
“Yes, why?”
“Look down at the steps of St. Bartholomew’s.” The
church was right across the street from Jamie’s office. “Do
you see me waving to you?”
“Yes, look, there you are! I’m waving back.”
Taking the time to give that silly, affectionate wave filled
me with good feelings that lasted for hours.
These were small gestures, but they made a surprisingly
big shift in the tone of our interactions. I had an opportunity
to make a larger gesture, too, because my mother-in-law,
Judy, had a significant birthday coming up.
Parents and in-laws play a big part in our lives. My
parents, Karen and Jack Craft, live in Kansas City, where I

grew up, but one or both of my parents visit every few
months, and we go to Kansas City to stay with them at least
twice a year. These visits are of the intense, what-shouldwe-all-do-today? variety. Jamie’s parents live just around
the corner. Literally. There’s one lone skinny town house
between their apartment building and our apartment
building. When we’re walking around the neighborhood, we
often see them heading toward us, on their way to get
coffee or to stop by the market—Judy with her silver hair
and beautiful scarves, Bob with his stiff gait and wool cap.
Fortunately for our marriage, Jamie and I agree on the
importance of our relationships with our two sets of parents,
so it was natural for me to be thinking about Judy’s
birthday. If we’d asked Judy how she’d like to celebrate,
she would have said she didn’t care. However, if you want
to know how people would like to be treated, it’s more
helpful to look at how they themselves act than what they
say. Judy is one of the most reliable people I’ve ever met;
she never forgets an obligation, fails to do something she
says she’ll do, or misses an important date. And though
she insists that exchanging birthday or holiday gifts isn’t
important to her, no one gives more thoughtful and
beautifully wrapped presents. She even gives us weddinganniversary presents that track the traditional theme for
each year: for our fourth, “fruits and flowers” anniversary,
she gave us a beautiful quilt with a fruits and flowers
design; for our tenth, “tin/aluminum” anniversary, she gave
us ten boxes of aluminum foil.
Jamie, his father, and his brother, Phil, aren’t good at

planning birthday celebrations. In the past, I would have
made a few reminder comments as Judy’s birthday
loomed, nagged at Jamie to make plans, then had a smug
I-told-you-so attitude when the birthday wasn’t celebrated
properly. My happiness project work hadn’t all been in vain,
however, and I saw the solution to the problem: I would take
charge.
I knew the kind of party Judy would like. She definitely
wouldn’t want a surprise party, and she’d prefer a family
party at home. She valued thoughtfulness far more than
lavishness, so homemade gifts that showed forethought
would mean more to her than anything store-bought, and
she’d like a home-cooked meal more than dinner in a fancy
restaurant. Fortunately, my brother-in-law, Phil, and his wife,
Lauren, are gifted chefs who run a catering company, so a
meal could be both home-cooked and fancy.
A vision came to me as if in a dream; then I needed
authority to execute it.
I called my father-in-law at the office. “Hi, Bob. I’m calling
to talk about plans for Judy’s birthday.”
“That’s a little far off, don’t you think?”
“Not really, not if we want to plan something special. And
I think we should.”
Pause.
“Well,” he said slowly, “I’d been thinking—”
“Because I have an idea, if you’d like to hear what I think
might be fun.”
“Oh yes,” he said with relief, “what do you have in mind?”

Bob immediately signed on to my plan. He’s a very good
sport about dealing with many kinds of tiresome family
tasks and obligations, but this kind of project didn’t play to
his strengths. In fact, everyone in the family cooperated
happily. They wanted Judy to have a wonderful birthday,
too; they just weren’t inclined to do the kind of planning it
would require.
In pursuit of my vision, I took complete control. A few
days before the party, I sent around an e-mail to Jamie,
Bob, Phil, and Lauren—and, to their credit, I didn’t get a
single snarky e-mail in response:
Hello all—Judy’s birthday party is just four days away.
We want a PILE of WRAPPED presents. This means
you! One is not enough!
Bob: Eliza and I wrapped your present. Are you bringing
champagne?
Jamie: have you bought the present from you and me?
Phil and Lauren: what are you making for dinner—is
there anything special I need to have on hand? what time
do you need to arrive? white wine or red wine with the
food? Did you say you were making menu cards? I think
Judy would think that was hilarious.
Everyone: I know I’d open myself up for family scorn if I
instructed everyone that it was inappropriate to wear your Ijust-rolled-off-the-couch-to-amble-over-to-your-party
clothes. So I won’t say a word about that. Just remember
that it is the sense of occasion and thoughtfulness that will
make it a great night.

This will be fun! xx g
I did a lot of preparation for this party. Eliza and I went to
the “Our Name Is Mud” pottery store, where Eliza decorated
dinner plates with theater themes, reflecting her
grandmother’s passion. We spent a pleasant hour (yes,
hour) scrolling through the Colette’s Cakes Web site to
choose the prettiest cake. Jamie and I shot a DVD of Eliza
singing a selection of Judy’s favorite songs, with Eleanor
toddling through the action.
On the night of the party, before everyone was due to
arrive at 6:30 P.M., I began my anxious last-minute tidying.
My mother loves to entertain, and from her I inherited a
propensity to preparty jitters, which we call “hostess
neurosis” experienced family members know to drift out of
sight lest they be conscripted into sudden vacuuming. But
when Jamie emerged from hiding at 6:29 P.M., he was
wearing khakis, a plaid shirt, and no shoes.
I took a moment; then, careful to use a light tone, I
remarked, “I wish you were wearing something a little
nicer.”
Jamie looked as if he took a moment, then answered, “I’ll
put on a nicer pair of pants, is that okay?” Then he went up
and changed his pants and his shirt and put on shoes, too.
The evening unfolded exactly as I’d hoped. Before the
adults sat down for dinner, the granddaughters ate chicken
salad
sandwiches—Judy’s
favorite—with
their
grandmother. We presented the birthday cake while the
girls were still awake so they could sing “Happy Birthday”

and eat a piece. Then we packed the girls off to bed, and
the adults sat down to eat (Indian food, Judy’s favorite).
“This was really a perfect evening,” Judy said as
everyone stood up to go. “I loved everything about it. My
presents, the food, the cake—really, everything was
wonderful.” It was obvious that Judy really did enjoy the
party, and everyone was pleased to have played a part, but
I think I enjoyed it most of all. I was so happy that it had
turned out just right.
The party underscored the truth of the third of my Twelve
Commandments: “Act the way I want to feel.” Although I
might have predicted that organizing the party would make
me feel resentful, in fact, acting in a loving way amplified my
loving feelings toward everyone in the family, particularly
Judy.
I must admit, however, that at times before the party, I felt
that Jamie and the others weren’t appreciative enough. I
was happy to do the planning, and I would’ve been annoyed
if anyone else had tried to take over, but still I wanted my
gold star. I wanted Jamie, Bob, or Phil to say, “Wow,
Gretchen, you’re really putting together a terrific evening!
Thanks so much for your brilliant, creative, and thoughtful
planning!” That wasn’t going to happen—so let it go. Do it

for myself.
But Jamie knows me very well. While Judy was opening
her gifts, Jamie pulled a box from a shelf and handed it to
me.
“This is for you,” he said.
“For me?” I was surprised and pleased. “Why do I get a

present?” Jamie didn’t answer, but I knew.
I opened the box to find a beautiful necklace made of
polished wooden beads. “I love it!” I said as I tried it on.
Maybe I shouldn’t have needed the recognition, but Jamie
was right, I did.
One of the great joys of falling in love is the feeling that the
most extraordinary person in the entire world has chosen
you. I remember being astonished when, after I pointed out
my new boyfriend, Jamie, to my law school roommate, she
admitted, “I’ve never seen him before.” I honestly couldn’t
imagine that everyone’s eyes weren’t drawn to him every
time he walked down the hallway or into the dining hall.
Over time, however, spouses start to take each other for
granted. Jamie is my fate. He’s my soul mate. He pervades
my whole existence. So, of course, I often ignore him.
The more readily you respond to a spouse’s bids for
attention, the stronger your marriage—but it’s easy to fall
into bad habits. Too often I hear myself murmuring “Mmmhmmm,” with my eyes glued to the book I’m reading as
Jamie makes a joke or starts a conversation. Also,
marriage has a strange muffling effect on some kinds of
deep communication. Most married people have probably
had the experience of hearing their spouse make a startling
revelation to a stranger at a barbecue; it’s hard to have
reflective, probing conversations during the tumult of daily
life.
I’d fallen into the bad marriage habit of being less

considerate of Jamie than I was of other people. As part of
my resolution to “Give proofs of love,” I tried to think of small
treats or courtesies for Jamie. One night when some
friends came over, after taking everyone else’s drink order,
I added, “How about you, Jamie? What would you like?”
Usually I just worry about taking care of the guests, so
Jamie looked surprised but pleased. His travel toiletry kit
was falling apart, so I bought him a new one and loaded it
with travel supplies. I left the new Sports Illustrated out on
the table, so he’d see it when he walked in the door from
work.
One way to make sure that you’re paying attention to your
spouse is to spend time alone together, and marriage
experts universally advise that couples have frequent childfree “date nights.” One of my happiness project challenges,
however, was to figure out what recommendations to
ignore, and I couldn’t work up any enthusiasm for “date
nights.” Jamie and I seem to go out a lot, to various school,
work, or friend functions, and we like to stay home when we
can. I dreaded the thought of adding another item to the
schedule.
Plus I figured Jamie would never go along with it.
Jamie surprised me when I floated the idea. “We can if
you want,” he said. “It might be fun to go see a movie or
have dinner, the two of us. But we go out so much, it’s nice
to stay in.” I agreed, but it made me happy that even though
he didn’t want to do it, he agreed with the goal.
In addition to ignoring some expert advice, I also sought
the advice of nonexperts. One night, when my book group

didn’t have much to say about the book we’d picked, I
asked for my friends’ suggestions about marriage.
“You should both go to bed at the same time,” said one
friend. “No matter what, something good will come of it.
You’ll get more sleep or have sex or have a conversation.”
“Before I got married, my boss told me that the secret to
a strong marriage is to leave at least three things unsaid
each day.”
“My husband and I never criticize each other for more
than one thing at a time.”
“My Quaker grandparents, who were married seventytwo years, said that each married couple should have an
outdoor game, like tennis or golf, and an indoor game, like
Scrabble or gin, that they play together.”
When I got home, I told Jamie that rule, and the next day
he brought home a backgammon set.
I’d been working on giving proofs of love when I decided to
push myself to the highest level of proof: a Week of
Extreme Nice.
What was “Extreme Nice”? It was an extreme sport, like
bungee jumping or skydiving, that stretched me beyond my
ordinary efforts, that showed me new depths within myself.
All done in the comfort of my own home. For a week, I was
extremely nice to Jamie. No criticism! No snapping! No
nagging! I even offered to drop his shoes off at the shoerepair shop before he asked me!
Extreme Nice reminded me to aim for a high standard of

behavior. It’s not right that I show more consideration to my
friends or family than to Jamie, the love of my life. We
wouldn’t be able to live together forever without a
disagreement, but I should be able to go more than a week
without nagging him. In a way, of course, the entire month of
February was an exercise in Extreme Nice, because all my
resolutions worked to Jamie’s benefit. But for this week, I
was going to take my niceness to a dramatic new level.
Too often I focused on the things that annoyed me: Jamie
postponed making scheduling decisions; he didn’t answer
my e-mails; he didn’t appreciate what I do to make our lives
run smoothly. Instead, I should have thought about all the
things I love about him. He’s kind, funny, brilliant, thoughtful,
loving, ambitious, sweet, a good father, son, and son-inlaw, bizarrely well informed on a wide range of subjects,
creative, hardworking, magnanimous. He kisses me and
says, “I love you,” every night before we go to sleep, he
comes to my side at parties and puts his arm around me,
he rarely shows irritation or criticizes me. He even has a full
head of hair.
On the first morning of Extreme Nice, Jamie asked
tentatively, “I’d like to get up and go to the gym and get it
over with. Okay?” He’s compulsive about going to the gym.
Instead of giving him a pained look or a grudging “Okay,
but go ahead and go now so you can get back soon, we
promised the girls we’d go to the park,” I said, “Sure, no
problem!”
It wasn’t easy.
A moment of reframing helped. How would I feel if Jamie

never wanted to go to the gym—or worse, if he couldn’t go?
I have a gorgeous, athletic husband. How lucky I am that he
wants to go to the gym.
During the week of Extreme Nice, when Jamie sneaked
into our bedroom to take a nap, I let him sleep while I made
lunch for Eliza and Eleanor; I kept our bathroom tidy instead
of leaving bottles and tubes scattered over the counter; he
rented The Aristocrats, and I said, “Great!” I stopped
leaving Popsicle wrappers all over the apartment. As
pathetic as it is to report, each of these instances took
considerable restraint on my part.
Because of Extreme Nice, when I discovered one night
that Jamie had thrown away The Economist and the
Entertainment Weekly that I hadn’t read yet, I didn’t badger
him about it. When I woke up the next morning, I saw how
insignificant it was and was relieved I hadn’t indulged in a
scene.
I’d always followed the adage “Don’t let the sun go down
on your anger,” which meant, in practical terms, that I
scrupulously aired every annoyance as soon as possible, to
make sure I had my chance to vent my bad feelings before
bedtime. I was surprised to learn from my research,
however, that the well-known notion of anger catharsis is
poppycock. There’s no evidence for the belief that “letting
off steam” is healthy or constructive. In fact, studies show
that aggressively expressing anger doesn’t relieve anger
but amplifies it. On the other hand, not expressing anger
often allows it to disappear without leaving ugly traces.

Extreme Nice also started me thinking about the degree
to which Jamie and I accepted orders from each other. It’s
safe to say that married people spend a lot of time trying to
coax each other into performing various chores, and the
ability to cooperate in tackling daily tasks is a key
component of a happy marriage. Often I wish I could tell
Jamie, “Call the super” or “Unload the dishwasher,” and
have him obey me unhesitatingly. And I’m sure he wishes
he could say, “Don’t eat outside the kitchen” or “Find the
keys to the basement storage room,” and have me obey
him. So I tried to do cheerfully whatever he asked me to do,
without debate.
As the days went by, I did feel a bit of resentment when
Jamie never seemed to notice that he was the winner of a
Week of Extreme Nice. Then I realized that I should be
pleased that he didn’t notice, because it showed that the
Week of Extreme Nice wasn’t a shocking improvement
over our regular, unextreme lives.
The Week of Extreme Nice proved the power of my
commandment to “Act the way I want to feel” because I was
treating Jamie extremely nicely, I found myself feeling more
tender toward him. Nevertheless, although it was a valuable
experiment, I was relieved when the week was over. I
couldn’t keep up the intensity of being that Nice. My tongue
hurt because I’d bitten it so often.
As I was filling in my Resolutions Chart on the last afternoon
of February, I was struck by the significance of the chart to

my happiness project. The process of constantly reviewing
my resolutions and holding myself accountable each day
was already having a big effect on my behavior, and it
wasn’t even March yet. I’d made dozens of resolutions in
my life—every New Year since I was nine or ten years old—
but keeping the Resolutions Chart was allowing me to live
up to my resolutions more faithfully than I’d even been able
to do before. I’d heard the business school truism “You
manage what you measure,” and I could see how this
phenomenon worked in my case.
The end of February brought me another important
realization as well. For a long time, I’d been puzzling to
come up with an overall theory of happiness, and one
afternoon, after many false starts, I arrived at my earthshattering happiness formula.
It hit me while I was on the subway. I was reading Bruno
Frey and Alois Stutzer’s Happiness and Economics, and I
looked up for a moment to ponder the meaning of the
sentence “It has been shown that pleasant affect,
unpleasant affect, and life satisfaction are separable
constructs.” Along the same lines, I’d just read some
research that showed that happiness and unhappiness (or,
in more scientific terms, positive affect and negative affect)
aren’t opposite sides of the same emotion—they’re distinct
and rise and fall independently. Suddenly, as I thought
about these ideas and about my own experience so far,
everything slipped into place, and my happiness formula
sprang into my mind with such a jolt that I felt as if the other
subway riders must have been able to see a lightbulb

appearing above my head.

To be happy, I need to think about feeling good, feeling
bad, and feeling right.
So simple, yet so profound. It looks like something you
might read on the cover of a glossy magazine, but it had
taken enormous effort to come up with a framework that
ordered and distilled everything I’d learned.
To be happy, I needed to generate more positive
emotions, so that I increased the amount of joy, pleasure,
enthusiasm, gratitude, intimacy, and friendship in my life.
That wasn’t hard to understand. I also needed to remove
sources of bad feelings, so that I suffered less guilt,
remorse, shame, anger, envy, boredom, and irritation. Also
easy to understand. And apart from feeling more “good”
and feeling less “bad,” I saw that I also needed to consider

feeling right.
“Feeling right” was a trickier concept: it was the feeling
that I’m living the life I’m supposed to lead. In my own case,
although I’d had a great experience as a lawyer, I’d been
haunted by an uncomfortable feeling—that I wasn’t doing
what I was “supposed” to be doing. Now, though my writing
career can be a source of “feeling bad” as well as “feeling
good,” I do “feel right.”
“Feeling right” is about living the life that’s right for you—
in occupation, location, marital status, and so on. It’s also
about virtue: doing your duty, living up to the expectations
you set for yourself. For some people, “feeling right” can
also include less elevated considerations: achieving a

certain job status or material standard of living.
After the first few minutes, the ecstasy of discovering my
formula wore off, and I realized that it wasn’t quite
complete. It was lacking some important element. I
searched for a way to account for the fact that people seem
programmed to be striving constantly, to be stretching
toward happiness. For example, we tend to think that we’ll
be slightly happier in the future than we are in the present.
And a sense of purpose is very important to happiness. But
my formula didn’t account for these observations. I
searched for the missing concept—was it striving?
Advancement? Purpose? Hope? None of these words
seemed right. Then I thought of a line from William Butler
Yeats. “Happiness,” wrote Yeats, “is neither virtue nor
pleasure nor this thing nor that, but simply growth. We are
happy when we are growing.” Contemporary researchers
make the same argument: that it isn’t goal attainment but
the process of striving after goals—that is, growth—that
brings happiness.
Of course. Growth. Growth explains the happiness
brought by training for a marathon, learning a new
language, collecting stamps; by helping children learn to
talk; by cooking your way through every recipe in a Julia
Child cookbook. My father was a great tennis player and
played a lot when I was growing up. At some point, he
started playing golf and, over time, gave up tennis. I asked
him why. “My tennis game,” he explained, “was gradually
getting worse, but my golf game is improving.”
People are very adaptable, and we quickly adjust to a

new life circumstance—for better or worse—and consider it
normal. Although this helps us when our situation worsens,
it means that when circumstances improve, we soon
become hardened to new comforts or privileges. This
“hedonic treadmill,” as it’s called, makes it easy to grow
accustomed to some of the things that make you “feel
good,” such as a new car, a new job title, or airconditioning, so that the good feeling wears off. An
atmosphere of growth offsets that. You may soon take your
new dining room table for granted, but tending your garden
will give you fresh joy and surprise every spring. Growth is
important in a spiritual sense, and I do think that material
growth is gratifying as well. As much as folks insist that
money can’t buy happiness, for example, it’s awfully nice to
have more money this year than you had last year.
So I arrived at my final formula, and it struck me as so
important that I named it the First Splendid Truth—I’d have
to trust that I’d have at least one more Splendid Truth by the
time the year was over. The First Splendid Truth: To be

happy, I need to think about feeling good, feeling bad,
and feeling right, in an atmosphere of growth.
I called Jamie the minute I got home. “At last!” I said. “I
have my happiness formula! It’s just one sentence long, and
with it, I can tie together all the studies, all the loose ends
that were driving me crazy.”
“That’s great!” said Jamie, very enthusiastically. Pause.
“Don’t you want to hear the formula?” I hinted. I had
decided not to expect Jamie to play the role of my female
writing partner—but sometimes he just was going to have

to do his best.
“Of course, right!” he said. “What’s the formula?”
Well, he was trying. And maybe it was my imagination,
but it seemed to me that now that I was trying harder, Jamie
was trying harder, too. I couldn’t put my finger on what was
different exactly, but he seemed more loving. He wasn’t
much interested in talking about happiness—in fact, he felt
like a bit of a martyr to my inexhaustible enthusiasm for the
subject—but he had started replacing the dead lightbulbs
without waiting for me to bug him, and he seemed to be
answering my e-mails more diligently. He bought us the
backgammon set. He asked me for my happiness formula.
When thinking about happiness in marriage, you may
have an almost irresistible impulse to focus on your
spouse, to emphasize how he or she should change in
order to boost your happiness. But the fact is, you can’t
change anyone but yourself. A friend told me that her
“marriage mantra” was “I love Leo, just as he is.” I love
Jamie just as he is. I can’t make him do a better job of
doing household chores, I can only stop myself from
nagging—and that makes me happier. When you give up
expecting a spouse to change (within reason), you lessen
anger and resentment, and that creates a more loving
atmosphere in a marriage.

3
MARCH
Aim Higher

WORK

Launch a blog.
Enjoy the fun of failure.
Ask for help.
Work smart.
Enjoy now.

Happiness is a critical factor for work, and work is a critical
factor for happiness. In one of those life-isn’t-fair results, it
turns out that the happy outperform the less happy. Happy
people work more hours each week—and they work more
in their free time, too. They tend to be more cooperative,
less self-centered, and more willing to help other people—
say, by sharing information or pitching in to help a
colleague—and then, because they’ve helped others,
others tend to help them. Also, they work better with others,
because people prefer to be around happier people, who
are also less likely to show the counterproductive behaviors
of burnout, absenteeism, counter-and nonproductive work,

work disputes, and retaliatory behavior than are less happy
people.
Happier people also make more effective leaders. They
perform better on managerial tasks such as leadership and
mastery of information. They’re viewed as more assertive
and self-confident than less happy people. They’re
perceived to be more friendly, warmer, and even more
physically attractive. A study showed that students who
were happy as college freshmen were earning more money
in their midthirties—without any wealth advantage to start.
Being happy can make a big difference in your work life.
Of course, happiness also matters to work simply
because work occupies so much of our time. A majority of
Americans work seven or more hours each day, and time
spent on vacation is shrinking. Also, work can be a source
of many of the elements necessary for a happy life: the
atmosphere of growth, social contact, fun, a sense of
purpose, self-esteem, recognition.
Whenever I feel blue, working cheers me. Sometimes
when I sink into a bad mood, Jamie says, “Why don’t you
go to your office for a while?” Even if I don’t feel like
working, once I plunge in, the encouraging feeling of getting
something accomplished, the intellectual stimulation, and
even the mere distraction lift me out of my crabbiness.
Because work is so crucial to happiness, another
person’s happiness project might well focus on choosing
the right work. I, however, had already been through a major
happiness quest career shift. I’d started out in law, and I’d
had a great experience. But when my clerkship with Justice

O’Connor drew to a close, I couldn’t figure out what job I
wanted next.
During this time, I visited the apartment of a friend who
was in graduate school studying education, and I noticed
several thick textbooks lying around her living room.
“Is this what they make you read for your program?” I
asked, idly flipping through the dense, dull pages.
“Yes,” she said, “but that’s what I read in my spare time,
anyhow.”
For some reason, that casual answer shocked me to
attention. What did I do in my spare time? I asked myself.
As much as I liked clerking, I never spent one second more
on legal subjects than I had to. For fun, I was writing a book
(which would later become Power Money Fame Sex), and
it occurred to me that perhaps I could write books for a
living. Over the next several months, I became convinced
that that was what I wanted to do.
I’m a very ambitious, competitive person, and it was
wrenching to walk away from my legal credentials and start
my career over from the beginning. Being editor in chief of
The Yale Law Journal, winning a legal writing prize—inside
the world of law, these credentials mattered a lot. Outside
the world of law, they didn’t matter at all. My ambition,
however, was also a factor in leaving the law. I’d become
convinced that passion was a critical factor in professional
success. People who love their work bring an intensity and
enthusiasm that’s impossible to match through sheer
diligence. I could see that in my co-clerks at the Supreme

Court: they read law journals for fun, they talked about
cases during their lunch hours, they felt energized by their
efforts. I didn’t.
Enthusiasm is more important to mastery than innate
ability, it turns out, because the single most important
element in developing an expertise is your willingness to
practice. Therefore, career experts argue, you’re better off
pursuing a profession that comes easily and that you love,
because that’s where you’ll be more eager to practice and
thereby earn a competitive advantage.
I love writing, reading, research, note taking, analysis,
and criticism. (Well, I don’t actually love writing, but then
practically no writer actually loves the writing part.) My past,
when I thought back, was littered with clues that I wanted to
be a writer. I’d written two novels, now locked in a drawer.
I’ve always spent most of my free time reading. I take
voluminous notes for no apparent reason. I majored in
English. And the biggest clue: I was writing a book in my
free time.
Why hadn’t it occurred to me sooner to think about
writing for a living? There are probably several reasons, but
the most important is the fact that it’s often hard for me to
“Be Gretchen.” Erasmus observed, “The chief happiness
for a man is to be what he is,” and although that sounds
easy enough, it has always been difficult for me. That’s why
“Be Gretchen” is the first of my Twelve Commandments.
I have an idea of who I wish I were, and that obscures my
understanding of who I actually am. Sometimes I pretend
even to myself to enjoy activities that I don’t really enjoy,

such as shopping, or to be interested in subjects that don’t
much interest me, such as foreign policy. And worse, I
ignore my true desires and interests.
“Fake it till you feel it” was an effective way to change my
mood in the moment, as I followed my Third Commandment
to “Act the way I want to feel,” but it isn’t a good governing
principle for major life decisions. By “faking it,” I could
become engaged in subjects and activities that didn’t
particularly interest me, but that enthusiasm paled in
comparison to the passion I felt for the subjects in which I
naturally found myself interested.
Self-knowledge is one of the qualities that I admire most
in my sister. Elizabeth never questions her own nature. In
school, I played field hockey (even though I was a terrible
athlete), took physics (which I hated), and wished that I
were more into music (I wasn’t). Not Elizabeth. She has
always been unswervingly true to herself. Unlike many
smart people, for example, she never apologized for her
love of commercial fiction or television—an attitude
vindicated by the fact that she started her career writing
commercial young-adult novels (my favorites among her
early works include The Truth About Love and Prom
Season) and then became a TV writer. I sometimes
wonder if I would have become a writer if Elizabeth hadn’t
become a writer first. I remember talking to her while I was
struggling with my decision.
“I worry about feeling legitimate,” I confessed. “Working
in something like law or finance or politics would make me

feel legitimate.”
I expected her to say something like “Writing is
legitimate” or “You can switch to something else if you don’t
like it,” but she was far more astute.
“You know,” she said, “you’ve always had this desire for
legitimacy, and you’ll have it forever. It’s probably why you
went to law school. But should you let it determine your next
job?”
“Well…”
“You’ve already done highly legitimate things, like
clerking on the Supreme Court, but do you feel legitimate?”
“Not really.”
“So you probably never will. Okay. Just don’t let that drive
your decisions.”
I took one more legal job—at the Federal
Communications Commission—then decided to try to start
a career as a writer. It was daunting to take the first step
toward an unfamiliar, untested career, but this switch was
made easier by the fact that Jamie and I were moving from
Washington, D.C., to New York City and Jamie had
decided to make a career shift, too. While I’d been reading
a book about how to write a book proposal, he’d been
taking a night class in financial accounting. I still remember
the day we decided to stop paying our bar fees.
Leaving law to become a writer was the most important
step I ever took to “Be Gretchen.” I’d decided to do what I
wanted to do, and I ignored options that, no matter how
enticing they might be for other people, weren’t right for me.
So if my goals for this month didn’t include a reevaluation

of my work, what did they include? I wanted to bring more
energy, creativity, and efficiency to my work life. No one
loves the familiar and the routine more than I do, but I
decided to stretch myself to tackle a work challenge that
would force me to navigate unfamiliar territory. I would think
about ways to work more efficiently by packing more
reading and writing into each day—and also more time
spent with other people. And perhaps most important, I
would take care to remind myself to remember how lucky I
was to be as eager for Monday mornings as I was for
Friday afternoons.
LAUNCH A BLOG.
My research had revealed that challenge and novelty are
key elements to happiness. The brain is stimulated by
surprise, and successfully dealing with an unexpected
situation gives a powerful sense of satisfaction. If you do
new things—visit a museum for the first time, learn a new
game, travel to a new place, meet new people—you’re
more apt to feel happy than people who stick to more
familiar activities.
This is one of the many paradoxes of happiness: we
seek to control our lives, but the unfamiliar and the
unexpected are important sources of happiness. What’s
more, because novelty requires more work from the brain,
dealing with novel situations evokes more intense
emotional responses and makes the passage of time

seem slower and richer. After the birth of his first child, a
friend told me, “One reason that I love having a new baby is
that time has slowed down. My wife and I felt like our lives
were speeding by, but the minute Clara was born, it was
like time stood still. Each week has been like an era, so
much happens.”
So how was I going to incorporate novelty and challenge
into my happiness project? I wanted to choose a goal
related to other things I liked to do—no violin lessons or
salsa-dancing classes for me, no matter what the experts
said. At the point when I was trying to figure this out, my
literary agent suggested that I start a blog.
“Oh, I wouldn’t know how to do that,” I answered. “It’s too
technical. I can barely figure out how to use TiVo.”
“These days, it’s pretty easy to set up a blog,” she said.
“Think about it. I bet you’d really enjoy it.”
She’d planted the idea in my mind, and I decided to give
it a try. Reading the research on the importance of
challenge to happiness had convinced me that I should
stretch myself to tackle a large, difficult goal. Not only that—
if I did manage to start a blog, it would connect me with
other people with similar interests, give me a source of selfexpression, and allow me a way to try to convince others to
start their own happiness projects.
But despite the promise of a big happiness payoff, I felt
apprehensive. I worried about the time and effort a blog
would consume, when I already felt pressed for time and
mental energy. It would require me to make decisions that I
didn’t feel equipped to make. It would expose me daily to

public criticism and failure. It would make me feel stupid.
Then, around this time, I happened to run into two
acquaintances who had blogs of their own, and together
they gave me the few pieces of key advice that I needed to
get started. Maybe these providential meetings were a
product of cosmic harmony—“when the student is ready,
the teacher appears”—or maybe they were examples of the
efficacy of articulating my goals. Or maybe I just got lucky.
“Use TypePad,” my first adviser suggested. “That’s what I
use.” She kept a blog about restaurants and recipes. “And
keep it simple—you can add features later, as you figure
out what you’re doing.”
“Post every day, that’s absolutely key,” insisted my
second adviser, who ran a law blog. Oh dear, I thought with
dismay, I’d planned to post three times a week. “And when
you send an e-mail to alert someone to a post you’ve
made, include the entire text of your post, not just the link.”
“Okay,” I answered uncertainly. “So, to follow up on that…
sounds like I should plan to send e-mails about my posts to
other bloggers?” Such a thing had never occurred to me.
“Um, yes,” he answered.
After three weeks of confused poking around on the
Internet, cautiously, almost furtively, I opened an account on
TypePad. Just this step—before I’d even made one
decision about the blog—filled me with anxiety and elation.
I kept reminding myself of one of my Secrets of Adulthood:
“People don’t notice your mistakes as much as you think.”
Even if I did something wrong on the blog, it wouldn’t be a
disaster.

Each day, I spent an hour or so working on it, and slowly
the blank template supplied by TypePad started to take
shape. I filled in the “About” section that described me. I
wrote a description of the blog to appear in the header. I
put in links to my books. I added my Twelve
Commandments. I sort of figured out what “RSS” was and
added an RSS button. Finally, on March 27, I took a deep
breath and wrote a “blog post” for the first time.

Today is the first day of the Happiness Project blog.
Now, what is the Happiness Project?
One afternoon, not too long ago, I realized with a jolt that I
was allowing my life to flash by without facing a critical
question: was I happy?
From that moment, I couldn’t stop thinking about
happiness. Was it mostly a product of temperament? Could
I take steps to be happier? What did it even mean to be
“happy”?
So The Happiness Project blog is my memoir of one
year in which I test-drive every principle, tip, theory, and
research-study result I can find, from Aristotle to St.
Thérèse to Benjamin Franklin to Martin Seligman to Oprah.
What advice actually works?
That very fact that I’ve started this blog makes me happy,
because now I’ve achieved one of my chief goals this
month (just in time, too). I set myself a task, worked toward
it, and achieved it.
Preparing to launch the blog reminded me of two of my

Secrets of Adulthood:
1. It’s okay to ask for help.
When trying to get started, I floundered until I thought
to do the obvious: ask for advice from friends with
blogs.
2. By doing a little bit each day, you can get a lot
accomplished. We tend to overestimate how much
we can accomplish in an hour or a week and
underestimate how much we can accomplish in a
month or a year, by doing just a little bit each day. “A
small daily task, if it be really daily, will beat the
labours of a spasmodic Hercules.”—Anthony Trollope
Since then I’ve posted six days a week, every week.
Seeing that first post hit the screen gave me an
enormous rush of triumph. I couldn’t believe I’d managed to
do it. The experts had certainly been correct about the
happiness effect of novelty, challenge, and an atmosphere
of growth.
However, I quickly discovered that even after I’d launched
it, my blog remained an excellent source of happiness
through challenge. To put it more baldly, it often drove me
crazy with frustration. The more I did, the more I wanted to
do. I wanted to add images. I wanted to drop the word
“typepad” out of my URL. I wanted to podcast. I wanted to
add live links to my TypeLists. As I was trying to solve these

problems, I’d find myself overwhelmed with nasty feelings of
ignorance and helplessness. The image wasn’t loading.
The images were too small. The links weren’t working.
Suddenly every word was underlined.
As I struggled to master these tasks, I felt rushed and
anxious when I couldn’t figure something out right away,
until I hit upon a way to help myself slow down: I “put myself
in jail.” “I’m in jail,” I’d tell myself. “I’m locked up with
nowhere to go and nothing to do except the task in front of
me. It doesn’t matter how long it takes, I have all the time I
want.” Of course, this wasn’t true, but telling myself that I
had all the time I needed helped me to focus.
As I worked on the blog, I often had to remind myself to
“Be Gretchen” and to be faithful to my vision of my project.
Many kind, smart people gave me advice. One person
encouraged me to “stick with irony,” and several people
suggested that I comment frequently on news items. One
friend, in all sympathy, told me that the phrase “The
Happiness Project” was no good and made the pitch for
“Oh Happy Day.”
“I can’t really imagine changing the name,” I said
uncertainly. “It’s been the Happiness Project right from the
first moment I thought of the idea.”
He shook his head. “It’s not too late to change!”
Another friend had a different suggestion. “You should
explore your conflicts with your mother,” he urged.
“Everyone’s interested in that.”
“Good point…but I don’t really have much conflict with my
mother,” I said, regretting my close relationship with my

mother for the first time ever.
“Huh,” he answered. Clearly he thought I was in massive
denial.
All these suggestions were sound and very well
intentioned, and each time I got a new piece of advice, I’d
worry; one of the biggest challenges posed by my blog was
the doubt raised by my own inner critic. Should I recast the
Happiness Project? Did the word “project” sound difficult
and unappealing? Was it egocentric to write so much about
my own experience? Was my earnest tone too preachy?
Very likely! But I didn’t want to be like the novelist who
spent so much time rewriting his first sentence that he
never wrote his second. If I wanted to get anything
accomplished, I needed to keep pushing ahead without
constantly second-guessing myself.
The gratifying thing was that once I’d launched it, people
responded enthusiastically to my blog just as it was. At first
I didn’t even know enough to be able to track my traffic, but
little by little, I figured out how to monitor it. I remember the
shock of delight I got when I’d checked Technorati, the
leading blog monitor, for the first time—and discovered that
I’d made it into the Technorati Top 5000, without even
knowing it. Because I’d launched the blog as part of my
personal happiness project, I hadn’t expected it actually to
attract an audience, so its slowly expanding success was
an unanticipated pleasure—and a great contributor to the
atmosphere of growth in my life.
One reason that challenge brings happiness is that it
allows you to expand your self-definition. You become

larger. Suddenly you can do yoga or make homemade
beer or speak a decent amount of Spanish. Research
shows that the more elements make up your identity, the
less threatening it is when any one element is threatened.
Losing your job might be a blow to your self-esteem, but the
fact that you lead your local alumni association gives you a
comforting source of self-respect. Also, a new identity
brings you into contact with new people and new
experiences, which are also powerful sources of
happiness.
That’s how it worked for me. My blog gave me a new
identity, new skills, a new set of colleagues, and a way to
connect with people who shared my interest. I’d expanded
my vision of the kind of writer I could be. I had become a
blogger.
ENJOY THE FUN OF FAILURE.
As I was pushing myself on the blog, I wanted to extend
myself in other parts of my work, too. I wanted to nudge
myself out of my comfort zone into my stretch zone. But
wasn’t that resolution inconsistent with “Be Gretchen”?
Yes and no. I wanted to develop in my natural direction.
W. H. Auden articulated this tension beautifully: “Between
the ages of twenty and forty we are engaged in the process
of discovering who we are, which involves learning the
difference between accidental limitations which it is our
duty to outgrow and the necessary limitations of our nature

beyond which we cannot trespass with impunity.” Starting
my blog, for example, made me feel anxious, but deep
down, I knew I could do it and would very likely enjoy it, once
I’d overcome the initial intimidating hurdles.
Pushing myself, I knew, would cause me serious
discomfort. It’s a Secret of Adulthood: Happiness doesn’t
always make you feel happy. When I thought about why I
was sometimes reluctant to push myself, I realized that it
was because I was afraid of failure—but in order to have
more success, I needed to be willing to accept more failure.
I remembered the words of Robert Browning: “Ah, but a
man’s reach should exceed his grasp, or what’s a heaven
for?”
To counteract this fear, I told myself, “ I enjoy the fun of
failure.” It’s fun to fail, I kept repeating. It’s part of being
ambitious; it’s part of being creative. If something is worth
doing, it’s worth doing badly.
And in fact this mantra helped me. The words “the fun of
failure” released me from my sense of dread. And I did fail.
I applied to the prestigious writing colony Yaddo, and I
wasn’t accepted. I pitched a column to The Wall Street
Journal, and although it looked promising, the editors
ultimately told me there was no room for it. I was dismayed
by the sales report for Forty Ways to Look at JFK, which
didn’t sell nearly as well as Forty Ways to Look at Winston
Churchill (“I don’t want to be flip,” my agent said
comfortingly, “but maybe you can use this disappointment
for your happiness project”). I talked to a friend about

starting a biography reading group, but the idea fizzled out.
I submitted an essay for the back page of The New York
Times Book Review, but it was rejected. I talked to a friend
about teaming up to do webcasts, but that didn’t work out. I
sent innumerable e-mails to try to get links to my blog, most
of which were ignored.
At the same time, risking failure gave me the opportunity
to score some successes. I was invited to contribute to the
enormously popular Huffington Post blog, and I started to
get picked up by huge blogs such as Lifehacker, Lifehack,
and Marginal Revolution. I was invited to join the LifeRemix
blog network. I wrote a piece about money and happiness
for The Wall Street Journal. I started going to a monthly
writers’ meeting. In the past, I think I might have shied away
from pursuing these goals, because I wouldn’t have wanted
to deal with rejection.
Friends told me about similar shifts in thinking that had
helped them. One friend said that in his office, whenever
crisis strikes, he tells everyone, “This is the fun part!”
Although I wasn’t even halfway through my happiness
project, I could already appreciate that feeling happier
made it easier for me to risk failure—or rather, made it
easier for me to embrace the fun of failure. A goal like
launching a blog was much easier to tackle when I was in a
happy frame of mind. Then, once the blog was launched, it
became an engine of happiness itself.
ASK FOR HELP.

Despite the fact that “It’s okay to ask for help” is one of my
Secrets of Adulthood, I constantly had to remind myself to
ask for help. I often had the immature and
counterproductive impulse to pretend to know things that I
didn’t know.
Perhaps because I was constantly reviewing my goal and
my resolutions in March, I came up with a novel way to ask
for help: I pulled together a strategy group. I had recently
met two writers, Michael and Marci. Each of us was
working on a book, each of us was trying to be smart about
our project and our overall career, each of us was an
extroverted type working alone much of the time and eager
for conversation. When I discovered that, coincidentally,
Michael and Marci knew each other, I had an inspiration.
In February, I’d identified a problem. I wished I had a
writing partner, someone with whom I could discuss writing
and career strategy. I’d let Jamie off the hook, mostly, but
maybe Michael, Marci, and I could form a group that would
help fill that need. Benjamin Franklin, along with twelve
friends, formed a club for mutual improvement that met
weekly for forty years. Maybe we could form a group, with a
slightly narrower mission than “mutual improvement.”
I tentatively floated the idea in an e-mail to Michael and
Marci. To my surprised gratification, they both immediately
embraced the idea. Michael suggested a structure for our
meetings. “How about every six weeks, for two hours?
Twenty minutes of catch-up conversation, then thirty
minutes each to talk about our individual concerns, with a

ten-minute break in the middle.” Marci and I embraced this
highly defined structure, which was a good indication that
the three of us were well matched.
“And we should give ourselves a name,” Marci said, only
half joking. “And what kind of group are we?”
We decided to call ourselves MGM, after our initials, and
we decided that we were a “writers’ strategy group.” We
didn’t talk about actual writing very much, though
sometimes one of us circulated a chapter or two; we spent
most of our time talking about strategy. Should Michael hire
a virtual assistant? Was Marci spending too much time
touring for her book? Should Gretchen send out a
happiness project newsletter? The group was an instant
success. Sitting with two other energetic, encouraging,
smart writers for a few hours exhilarated me. Also, as with
groups such as Weight Watchers and Alcoholics
Anonymous, and with my Resolutions Chart, we gave one
another a sense of accountability.
Only after we’d met a few times did I stumble on some
career-building articles that suggested forming a
“community of aspirants” or, in less elaborate terms, a
“goals group.” Shoot, I’d thought I’d invented the idea.
WORK SMART.
Turning aside from lofty ambition to prosaic details, I
figured that I’d work better if I spent some time thinking
about how to boost my efficiency. At the very least, I could

make my day feel calmer. I felt as if I never had enough time
for all the work I wanted to do.
I started paying close attention to how I spent my days.
Were there pockets of time that I was wasting? Could I find
the equivalent of loose change under the sofa, like an
overlooked habit of watching a Law & Order rerun every
night? Alas, I was running pretty close to efficiency. If I was
watching a rerun, I was paying bills at the same time.
Nevertheless, considering the way I spent my time yielded
some good results.
I changed the way I thought about productive time. In the
past, I’d believed that I couldn’t sit down and write
productively unless I had at least three or four hours with no
interruptions. Often, that was hard to arrange, and I felt
inefficient and frustrated. To test that assumption, for a few
weeks, I added a note on my Resolutions Chart to remind
myself of what I’d worked on each day. It didn’t take me
long to see that I did better when I had less time. Not
several hours but ninety minutes turned out to be the
optimally efficient length of time—long enough for me to get
some real work done but not so long that I started to goof
off or lose concentration. As a consequence, I began to
organize my day into ninety-minute writing blocks,
separated by different non-writing tasks: exercising,
meeting someone, making a phone call, tinkering with my
blog.
Also, although I’d always considered fifteen minutes to
be too short a period in which to get anything done, I
started to push myself to squeeze in an extra fifteen

minutes somewhere during the day. This was often wedged
in between two appointments or at the very end of the
workday. It did, indeed, boost my productivity. Fifteen
minutes a day, several times a week, was not insignificant
—fifteen minutes was long enough to draft a blog post, to
make notes on research that I’d been reading, or to answer
some e-mails. As I’d found in January, when I started
applying the “one-minute rule” and the “evening tidy-up,”
small efforts, made consistently, brought significant results.
I felt more in control of my workload.
I halfheartedly considered trying to get up early each day
to work for an hour or so before my family awoke. Anthony
Trollope, the nineteenth-century writer who managed to be
a prolific novelist while also revolutionizing the British postal
system, attributed his productivity to his habit of starting his
day at 5:30 A.M. In his Autobiography, he notes, “An old
groom, whose business it was to call me, and to whom I
paid £5 extra for the duty, allowed himself no mercy.” Which
suggests that it’s not easy to get out of bed at 5:30 A.M.—
especially if you don’t have an old groom on hand to shake
you awake. Nope, 6:30 A.M. was as early as I could push it.
I found a small way to make my office more pleasant. At
a party at someone’s house, I smelled a scent so lovely that
I walked around the room sniffing until I found the source: a
Jo Malone Orange Blossom candle. Although I never buy
this sort of thing, when I got home, I went straight to the
computer and ordered one for myself, and I started the
habit of burning it in my office. Though I sometimes mocked
the scented-candle-pushing brand of happiness building, I

discovered that there is something nice about working in an
office with a candle burning. It’s like seeing snow falling
outside the window or having a dog snoozing on the carpet
beside you. It’s a kind of silent presence in the room and
very pleasant.
ENJOY NOW.
As I worked, and especially when I was pushing myself to
do things that made me slightly uncomfortable, I kept
reminding myself of my resolution to “Enjoy now.” As a
writer, I often found myself imagining some happy future:
“When I sell this proposal…” or “When this book comes
out…”
In his book Happier, Tal Ben-Shahar describes the
“arrival fallacy,” the belief that when you arrive at a certain
destination, you’ll be happy. (Other fallacies include the
“floating world fallacy,” the belief that immediate pleasure,
cut off from future purpose, can bring happiness, and the
“nihilism fallacy,” the belief that it’s not possible to become
happier.) The arrival fallacy is a fallacy because, though you
may anticipate great happiness in arrival, arriving rarely
makes you as happy as you anticipate.
First of all, by the time you’ve arrived at your destination,
you’re expecting to reach it, so it has already been
incorporated into your happiness. Also, arrival often brings
more work and responsibility. It’s rare to achieve something
(other than winning an award) that brings unadulterated

pleasure without added concerns. Having a baby. Getting a
promotion. Buying a house. You look forward to reaching
these destinations, but once you’ve reached them, they
bring emotions other than sheer happiness. And of course,
arriving at one goal usually reveals another, yet more
challenging goal. Publishing the first book means it’s time
to start the second. There’s another hill to climb. The
challenge, therefore, is to take pleasure in the “atmosphere
of growth,” in the gradual progress made toward a goal, in
the present. The unpoetic name for this very powerful
source of happiness is “pre-goal-attainment positive
affect.”
When I find myself focusing overmuch on the anticipated
future happiness of arriving at a certain goal, I remind
myself to “Enjoy now.” If I can enjoy the present, I don’t need
to count on the happiness that is (or isn’t) waiting for me in
the future. The fun part doesn’t come later, now is the fun
part. That’s another reason I feel lucky to enjoy my work so
much. If you’re doing something that you don’t enjoy and
you don’t have the gratification of success, failure is
particularly painful. But doing what you love is itself the
reward.
When I thought back on the experience of writing my
Churchill biography, for example, the most thrilling moment
came when I was sitting at a study table at the library where
I do most of my writing and I read two lines from Churchill’s
speech to the House of Commons on June 4, 1940: “We
shall go on to the end…we shall defend our island,
whatever the cost may be.” As I read, the thought occurred

to me, “Churchill’s life fits the pattern of classical tragedy.”
This realization gave me such an ecstatic shock of
recognition that tears welled up in my eyes. I spent the next
several days testing my theory, and the more I read, the
more excited I became. The requirements of a classical
tragedy are very stringent, yet I was able to prove that
Churchill’s life met every one of them. Ah, that was the fun
part.
But the arrival fallacy doesn’t mean that pursuing goals
isn’t a route to happiness. To the contrary. The goal is
necessary, just as is the process toward the goal. Friedrich
Nietzsche explained it well: “The end of a melody is not its
goal; but nonetheless, if the melody had not reached its end
it would not have reached its goal either. A parable.”
To enjoy now, there was something else I was going to
have to master: my dread of criticism. Too much concern
about whether I was getting praise or blame, too much
anticipatory anxiety about what my detractors would say—
those kinds of fears spoiled my pleasure in my work and,
what’s more, probably weakened my work.
I’d had a chance to tackle this very issue, during my
preparation stage for the happiness project, when The
Washington Post published a critical review of my
biography Forty Ways to Look at JFK. At that point, I’d
learned a lot of happiness theories and I’d identified my
Twelve Commandments, but I hadn’t put much into practice.
The review made me feel depressed, defensive, and
angry; I wished that I felt secure, open to criticism, with

benevolent feelings toward the reviewer. I decided to apply
my Third Commandment, to “Act the way I want to feel.”
Would it really work in this extreme case? I made myself do
something I did not want to do. I sent a friendly e-mail to the
reviewer, in order to show myself that I was confident
enough to take criticism graciously and able to respond
without attack or self-justification. It took me a very, very
long time to compose that e-mail. But guess what—it
worked. The minute I sent it, I felt better.
Hello David Greenberg—
As you can imagine, I read with interest your review of my
book on Wednesday.
While writing, I have the disheartening habit of
composing negative reviews—imagining how I’d criticize
the very work I’m doing. Your review hit three of my dark
themes—gimmick, arbitrary, obvious. You criticized me
most where I criticized myself. In brighter moments, I was
satisfied that I captured some of the insight I felt I gained
into Kennedy, and I’m sorry I wasn’t able to convey that to
you.
If I write another “forty ways” biography, I’m sure I’ll
benefit from your comments. For example, I debated about
whether to reiterate the material from my Churchill book
about why the number “forty,” the tradition of multiple ways
of seeing (Wallace Stevens, Monet, Rashomon—alas, I
didn’t read Julian Barnes’s brilliant Flaubert’s Parrot until
after I’d written my Churchill book), etc.—but it struck me as

somehow pompous to go over all that again. Now I see that
of course it’s frustrating to the reader not to see that
argument set forth afresh.
Good luck with your work, and best wishes, Gretchen Rubin
The minute I pushed “send,” I felt terrific. No matter what
David Greenberg did, I’d changed myself. I felt
magnanimous, open to criticism, sending good wishes to
someone who had hurt me. I didn’t even care if I got a reply.
But I did. I got a very nice response.
Dear Gretchen (if I may),
Thanks for your note. I admire and applaud you for taking
the review in stride and for making the overture to me. I
know that when I received mixed or critical reviews of my
book, I certainly didn’t react with such aplomb. But on such
occasions, more experienced authors reminded me that
any review is just one person’s opinion, and in the end the
reviews vanish with the next day’s papers while the books
endure (which is why we write books, in part). In any event,
whether or not you felt my comments were apt, I hope you
considered the tone and treatment to be respectful and fair.
Again, it was good of you to write, and I return the
good wishes to you in your work and pursuits.
Sincerely,
David Greenberg
Having an effective strategy to deal with criticism of my

work made it easier to enjoy the process of working. Also,
this exchange had an added benefit, one that I, as the one
being reviewed, didn’t consider at first. We often dislike
those whom we’ve hurt, and I bet David Greenberg wasn’t
very pleased to see my name pop up in his e-mail in-box.
By initiating a friendly exchange, I showed that I bore no
hard feelings and let him off the hook. If we were ever
introduced at some cocktail party, we could meet on
friendly terms.
Nevertheless, even while I was writing about happiness
and focused precisely on the issue of handling criticism, I
never did manage entirely to “Enjoy now” with no anxiety
about the future. I spent a lot of time arguing with imaginary
critics of my happiness project.
“You have it easy,” one whispered in my ear. “No
cocaine, no abuse, no cancer, no divorce, no threehundred-pound weight loss…you didn’t even have to quit
smoking!”
“What about the millions of people who go to bed
hungry?” another added. “What about people who suffer
from real depression?”
“You don’t care about plumbing the depths of your
psyche.”
“You’re not spiritual enough.”
“The idea of a one-year experiment is stale.”
“You just talk about yourself.”
Oh, well, I told myself, if it’s not one thing, it’s another. If I
do my project my way, I’m unspiritual and gimmicky; if I tried
to do it a different way, I’d be inauthentic and fake. Might as

well “Be Gretchen.”
March’s focus on work and happiness highlighted a tricky
issue: the relationship between ambition and happiness.
There’s a common belief that happiness and ambition are
incompatible. Many ambitious people I’ve known seem
eager to claim that they aren’t happy, almost as a way to
emphasize their zeal, in echo of Andrew Carnegie’s
observation “Show me a contented man, and I’ll show you a
failure.”
Perhaps the happiness-thwarting feelings of
dissatisfaction, competitiveness, and jealousy are
necessary goads for ambition. If I remained ambitious, was
it impossible to be happy? If my project made me happier,
would I become complacent? Was the arrival fallacy an
important mechanism to keep me striving?
Studies show that many creative, influential people in the
arts and public life score above average in “neuroticism”
(i.e., they have a greater propensity to experience negative
emotions); this discontent arguably urges them to higher
achievement. Other studies, however, show that people
tend to think more flexibly and with more complexity when
they’re feeling happy.
But whatever a wide-ranging study might show about the
connection between ambition and happiness generally, I
realized that for my own part, I was much more likely to take
risks, reach out to others, and expose myself to rejection
and failure when I felt happy. When I felt unhappy, I felt

defensive, touchy, and self-conscious. For example, if I’d
been feeling unhappy, I doubt I would have proposed
forming a writers’ strategy group. I wouldn’t have wanted to
open myself up to rejection or failure.
“So,” Jamie asked one night at the end of March, as we
were getting ready for bed, “do you think your project is
making any difference?”
“Oh yes,” I said without hesitation, “it’s working. Can’t you
see a change?”
“I think so,” he said. “But it’s hard to tell from the outside.
You’ve always seemed pretty happy to me.”
I was pleased to hear him say that, because the more I
learned about happiness, the more I realized how much my
happiness influenced the people around me.
“I feel a little blue today myself,” he sighed.
“You do? Why?” I said, crossing the room to put my arms
around him. (As I’d learned last month, a hug is cheering.)
“I don’t know. I just felt low all day.”
I opened my mouth to start firing probing questions, but it
was obvious that Jamie didn’t really feel like talking.
“Well,” I said instead, “let’s turn off the light. If you’re
feeling down, you’ll feel better after a good night’s sleep.”
“Did you read a study about that?”
“Nope, I offer that little nugget of wisdom on my own
authority.”
“Well,” he said, “I think you’re right. Let’s go to sleep.”
It worked.

4
APRIL
Lighten Up

PARENTHOOD

Sing in the morning.
Acknowledge the reality of people’s feelings.
Be a treasure house of happy memories.
Take time for projects.

My

children are a tremendous source of happiness.
They’ve given me some of the high points of my life and
also many of the small moments that make the days
happier. I’m not alone in this. Many people have told me
that the very happiest moments of their lives have been the
births of their children.
Of course, my children are also a tremendous source of
worry, irritation, expense, inconvenience, and lost sleep. In
fact, some happiness experts argue that although parents
—like me—insist that their children are a major source of
happiness, this belief isn’t true. One study that examined a
group of women’s emotions during their daily activities
showed that they found “child care” only slightly more

pleasant than commuting. Marital satisfaction nose-dives
after the first child is born and picks up again once the
children leave home. From my own experience, I knew that
Jamie and I squabbled far more often once we had kids,
we had fewer adventures, and we had less time for each
other.
Nevertheless, despite these findings, I had to reject the
experts’ argument that children don’t bring happiness.
Because they do. Not always in a moment-to-moment way,
perhaps, but in a more profound way. After all, in a poll
where people were asked, “What one thing in life has
brought you the greatest happiness?” the most common
answer was “children” or “grandchildren” or both. Were all
these people mired in self-deception?
In many ways, the happiness of having children falls into
the kind of happiness that could be called fog happiness.
Fog is elusive. Fog surrounds you and transforms the
atmosphere, but when you try to examine it, it vanishes.
Fog happiness is the kind of happiness you get from
activities that, closely examined, don’t really seem to bring
much happiness at all—yet somehow they do.
I identified fog happiness during a party. My host was
bustling around the kitchen, juggling the preparation and
presentation of the three major dishes he was serving to
thirty people.
“Are you having fun at your own party?” I asked him, when
I probably should have gotten out of his way.
“Mm, not really right now,” he said distractedly. “I’ll have
fun when it’s over.” Really, when? I wondered. Doing the

dishes? Rearranging the furniture? Carrying sticky bottles
of wine to the recycling bin? Where and when, exactly, was
the fun?
That started me thinking. Many activities that I consider
enjoyable aren’t much fun while they’re happening—or
ahead of time or afterward. Throwing a party. Giving a
performance. Writing. When I stop to analyze my emotions
during the various stages of these activities, I see
procrastination, dread, anxiety, nervousness, annoyance at
having to do errands and busywork, irritation, distraction,
time pressure, and anticlimax. Yet these activities
undoubtedly make me “happy.” And so it is with raising
children. At any one time, the negative may swamp the
positive, and I might wish I were doing something else.
Nevertheless, the experience of having children gives me
tremendous fog happiness. It surrounds me, I see it
everywhere, despite the fact that when I zoom in on any
particular moment, it can be hard to identify.
Before I actually gave birth, the aspect of parenthood that
intimidated me most was its irreversibility. Spouse, job,
work, location—most of the big decisions in life can be
reconsidered. Change might be difficult and painful, but it’s
possible. But a baby is different. A baby is irrevocable.
Once Eliza was born, however, I never gave another
thought to the irreversibility of parenthood. I sometimes
miss the freedom and leisure of my pre-Mommy days, but I
never regret having children; instead, I worry about being a
good enough parent. My standards for parenting aren’t
especially high: I never fuss much about whether my

daughters’ food is organic or whether their rooms are tidy.
But when I started my happiness project, I was uneasy
about the fact that I wasn’t living up to my own standard of
behavior. I lost my temper, I didn’t make enough time for
fun, I knew I didn’t appreciate enough this fleeting time in
my children’s lives. Though the stages of diapers and
dress-up clothes and car seats seem interminable, they
pass quickly, and too often, I was so focused on checking
off the items of my to-do list that I forgot what really
mattered.
Eliza, bright-eyed and snaggle-toothed at seven years
old, is even-tempered, loving, and oddly sensible for a
child. She’s wildly creative and loves any kind of
imaginative play or homemade project. Apart from the
occasional histrionic sulking fit, she’s a delight. Eleanor, at
age one, with her dimples, her big blue eyes, and her
never-growing hair, is a darling toddler. She has a wide
emotional range—she laughs easily, and she cries easily.
She’s friendly to everyone, fearless, very determined, and
already frustrated by not being able to keep up with Eliza.
My goal for April, the month dedicated to parenthood? To
become more tender and playful with my two daughters. I
wanted a peaceful, cheerful, even joyous atmosphere at
home—and I knew that nagging and yelling weren’t the way
to achieve that. I had two healthy, affectionate little girls, and
I wanted my actions as a parent to rise to the level of that
good fortune. I wanted to stop my quick bursts of temper—I
indulged in that behavior all too often, and then, because it
made me feel bad, I behaved even worse. I wanted to be

more lighthearted. I wanted to take steps to preserve the
happy memories from this time.
Eliza was old enough to grasp, dimly, that I was writing a
book about happiness, but I didn’t tell her that I was working
on my parenting skills. As a child, I would have been
shocked to learn that my parents gave any thought to how
they behaved as parents; they seemed all-wise, practically
all-powerful, without any self-doubt. Eliza, I figured, would
be unnerved by the notion that I was questioning my actions
as a mother.
But although I didn’t tell her what I was doing, April Fool’s
Day conveniently presented me with an opportunity to keep
some of my resolutions on the very first day of the month.
The night before, I’d put a bowl of Cheerios and milk in
the freezer, and on the morning of April 1, I presented it to
Eliza with a spoon—and watched as she tried,
unsuccessfully, to dig in. Her puzzled look was hilarious.
“April Fool’s!” I said.
“Really?” she answered, thrilled. “It’s a real April Fool’s
joke? Great!” She examined the bowl closely, then ran to
show it to Jamie. She got a big kick out of the prank.
The night before, I’d already gotten into bed when I
realized that I’d forgotten to prepare the bowl, and I’d been
tempted to drop the whole idea. I remembered my goals for
April, though, and hauled myself out of bed. When morning
came, I was so happy that I’d taken the time to set up the
joke. The fact is, life is more fun when I keep my
resolutions.

SING IN THE MORNING.
In a family, it’s worth the effort to find ways to get mornings
running smoothly, because while mornings set the tone for
everyone’s days, they also tend to be stressful as adults try
to get themselves organized while also chivvying their
children to get ready. From a conversation with Eliza, I got
the idea of my resolution to “Sing in the morning.”
“What did you do at school today?” I’d asked her.
“We talked about how our parents wake us up in the
morning.”
“What did you say?” I prodded, with curiosity and
trepidation.
“With a good-morning song.”
Why she said this, I don’t know, because I’d done that
only a few times in her whole life. After hearing her
comment, though, I vowed to make a habit of it. (This
conversation also reminded me that just as adults counsel
themselves not to do anything that they wouldn’t want
reported in the newspaper, parents shouldn’t do anything
they wouldn’t want featured in an essay displayed on the
wall for Parent Night.)
As soon as I started, I saw that singing in the morning
really had a cheering effect. I’d become a true believer of
the “Act the way I want to feel” commandment; by acting
happy, I made myself feel happy. After singing a verse of
“I’ve Got a Golden Ticket,” I found it easier to resist slipping
into a hectoring tone.

Singing in the morning reminded me to follow my Ninth
Commandment, to “Lighten up.” I tried to free-ride off my
children’s laughter—Eleanor especially has always been
unusually quick to laugh, even for a little kid—by pushing
myself to enter into the mood, to have at least one moment
of pure fun with Eliza and Eleanor each day, to laugh at
Jamie’s playfulness, and to take a light tone even when I’m
chastising, nagging, or fending off complaints.
Easier said than done. On day three of my resolution, I
woke up with a swollen, sore eyelid. I’m casual about most
health-related matters, but because I’m so nearsighted that
I’m legally blind, I take any eye problem very seriously. I’m
prone to sties, but this didn’t look like a sty.
Singing in the morning was the farthest thing from my
mind.
Because Jamie was traveling on business, I couldn’t
leave the girls with him while I did some amateur medical
diagnosis. Eliza is allowed to watch cartoons in the
morning until Eleanor comes to the kitchen (I know, I
shouldn’t let her, but I do), so I sent her to the TV and left
Eleanor singing to herself in her crib while I checked
Internet health sites. I poked around until I assured myself
that this was probably nothing serious.
By then, Eleanor was roaring “Up, up! Mama!” so I went
in to rescue her. She pointed to her diaper and said,
“Hurts.”
When I took off her diaper, I discovered an angry diaper
rash. I also discovered that we had only one lone baby wipe
left in the entire apartment. As I changed her diaper, using

every inch of the sole wipe, Eliza, still in her favorite cherryprinted nightgown, came charging in.
“It’s 7:18, and I haven’t even eaten breakfast!” she wailed
in accusation. Eliza hates to be late; in fact, she hates to be
on time; she likes to be early. “I’m supposed to be done
eating and getting dressed by 7:20! We’re going to be
late!”
Did I burst into cheering song? Did I laugh in a merry but
comforting way? Did I murmur reassuringly, “Don’t worry,
sweetheart, we have plenty of time”?
No. I snarled in my most menacing voice, “Wait a
minute!” She backed off and started sobbing.
It took every ounce of my willpower not to keep yelling
more, but after that first terrible moment, I managed to hold
back. I gave Eliza a quick hug and said, “You go get
dressed while I make breakfast. We still have plenty of time
until school starts.” (“Make breakfast” in this case meant
spreading crunchy peanut butter on toast.) We did in fact
have plenty of time. Because of Eliza’s concern for
promptness, our mornings have a sizable cushion—
especially since January, when I began doing the evening
tidy-up. Even after the commotion, we managed to make
an on-time departure.
The effort to stop yelling taxed my self-control to the
uttermost, but as we walked to school, I realize how much
more pleasant our morning had been than it would have
been had I kept yelling. As we walked down the street, I
started singing “Oh, What a Beautiful Morning,” until an
embarrassed Eliza hushed me up.

The most effective way to lighten up—but also the most
difficult, because a whining child sucks every particle of
humor out of my head—is to make a joke. One morning
when Eliza whined, “Why do I have to go to class today? I
don’t want to go to tae kwon do,” I wanted to snap back,
“You always say you don’t want to go, but then you have
fun,” or “I don’t like to hear all this grumbling.” Instead, even
though it wasn’t easy, I sang out, “‘I don’t want to go to tae
kwon do’—you’re a poet and you don’t know it!” After a
minute I added, “I don’t give a snap about going to tap.”
Eliza answered, “I want to stop going to hip-hop.”
I hate every kind of bathroom humor, but she loves it, so I
whispered, “I don’t give a fart about going to art.”
She thought this was hilarious, then added, “I’d rather
pass gas than to go to science class.” We laughed until our
stomachs hurt, and she didn’t mention tae kwon do again.
This technique worked better than telling her to buck up,
and it was certainly more fun.
I hit on another rather Pollyannaish strategy that, to my
astonishment, really worked to keep me in a “Sing in the
morning” frame of mind, all day long: I “reframed” a
particular chore by deciding that I enjoyed doing it.
For example, as Eleanor’s birthday approached, I
dreaded doing all the little errands—ordering the BaskinRobbins ice cream cake (a Rubin family tradition), taking
the girls to the party store to choose paper plates, buying
presents, and making invitations for our family birthday
party. I begrudged the time I spent on it. Then I told myself, “I

love making plans for Eleanor’s birthday! How fun! I’ll never
have a baby this young again!” And…it really did change
my attitude. I also reframed by imagining that someone had
offered to take over the task from me. Would I let someone
else plan Eleanor’s party? Nope. That realization also
changed my attitude toward the task.
A friend of mine told me that when his sons were five and
three years old, they woke up at six every morning. On the
weekends, week after week, he and his wife tried to
persuade them to go back to sleep or to play quietly—with
no success.
So finally he gave up. He’d let his wife stay in bed, and
he’d get the boys dressed and out the door. He’d stop for
coffee, then the three of them would head for the park, and
he’d watch them play for an hour before they returned home
for breakfast.
These days his boys sleep late on the weekends, and
now, my friend told me, those mornings are some of his
clearest and happiest memories of that period. The
morning light, the quiet park, his little boys racing across
the grass.
The days are long, but the years are short.
ACKNOWLEDGE THE REALITY OF PEOPLE’S
FEELINGS.
As part of my research for the month, I reread, for the fourth
time, the collected works of the world’s greatest parenting

experts, Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish, and in particular
their two masterpieces, Siblings Without Rivalry and How
to Talk So Kids Will Listen and Listen So Kids Will Talk. I
discovered these books when a friend of mine mentioned
that two friends of hers had the best-behaved children
she’d ever seen. So when I met that couple, I asked for their
secret—and they swore by How to Talk So Kids Will
Listen. I ordered it that night, and I became an instant
follower of Faber and Mazlish.
What’s different about their books is that they’re packed
with practical advice and examples. So many parenting
books belabor the arguments about the importance of the
goals—as if anyone is disputing that children should be well
behaved, respectful, able to tolerate frustration, selfdirected, and so on. Fine, but what do you do when your
child throws a tantrum in the cereal aisle?
The most important lesson from Faber and Mazlish’s
books is simple and as applicable to adults as to children:
we should acknowledge the reality of people’s feelings. In
other words, don’t deny feelings such as anger, irritation,
fear, or reluctance; instead, articulate the feeling and the
other person’s point of view. Sounds simple, right? Wrong. I
had no idea how often I contradicted my children’s
assertions of their feelings until I tried to quit. Too often, I
said things like “You’re not afraid of clowns,” “You can’t
possibly want more Legos, you never play with the ones
you have,” “You’re not hungry, you just ate.”
Crazily enough, I discovered, just repeating what my child

was saying, to show that I appreciated her point of view,
was often enough to bring peace. Instead of saying to
Eleanor, “Don’t whine, you love to take a bath!” I said,
“You’re having fun playing. You don’t want to take a bath
now, even though it’s time.” This strategy was astoundingly
effective—which suggested to me that much of children’s
frustration comes not from being forced to do this or that
but rather from the sheer fact that they’re being ignored.
So what strategies could I use to help show my children
that I was acknowledging their feelings?

Write it down.
For some reason, the simple act of writing something down
makes a big impression on my children, even the
preliterate Eleanor. To restore peace, it can be enough to
whip out pen and paper and announce, “I’m going to write
that down. ‘Eleanor does not like to wear snow boots!’”

Don’t feel as if I have to say anything.
Eliza can be a bit of a sulker. Sometimes I pull her onto my
lap and cuddle her for five minutes, and when we get up,
she’s cheerful again.

Don’t say “no” or “stop.”
Instead, I try to give information that shows that although I
understand their desire, I have a reason for not granting it:
“You’d like to stay, but we have to go home because Daddy
forgot his keys.” Studies show that 85 percent of adult
messages to children are negative—“no,” “stop,” “don’t”—

so it’s worth trying to keep that to a minimum. Instead of
saying, “No, not until after lunch,” I try to say, “Yes, as soon
as we’ve finished lunch.”

Wave my magic wand.
“If I had a magic wand, I’d make it warm outside so we
didn’t have to wear coats.” “If I were Ozma, I’d make a box
of Cheerios appear right now.” This shows that I understand
what my kids want and would accommodate them if I could.

Admit that a task is difficult.
Studies show that people tend to persevere longer with
problems they’ve been told are difficult as opposed to
easy. I’d been doing the opposite with Eleanor. Thinking I
was being encouraging, I’d say, “It’s not tough to pull off
your socks, just give it a try.” I switched to saying things
such as “Socks can be tough to get off. Sometimes it helps
to push down the back part over your ankle, instead of
pulling on the toe.”
Not long after I’d made my cheat sheet, I had a chance to
put these principles to work.
One Saturday, Jamie and I were talking in our bedroom
when Eliza burst in crying. We knew it was real crying and
not fake crying, because Eliza has a very convenient “tell”
when she’s staging her tears. If she balls up her hands and
holds them to her eyes, like an actress in a melodrama,
she’s faking. This time, her hands were down, so we knew
she was really upset.

I pulled her onto my lap, and she sobbed into my
shoulder, “People always pay attention to Eleanor, but
nobody ever pays any attention to me.”
Jamie and I looked at each other with worried
expressions, and Jamie gave me the look that means “I
have no idea what to do, can you handle this one?”
Just in time, I remembered my resolution, “Acknowledge
other people’s feelings.” Although I knew that it wasn’t
factually true that no one ever paid any attention to Eliza, I
managed to restrain my first impulse, which was to argue,
“What about the five games of Uno I played with you last
night?” and “You know everyone loves you just as much as
Eleanor.”
Instead, I said, “Wow, that hurts your feelings. You feel
ignored.” That seemed to help. I rocked her for a few
minutes in silence, then added, “You feel like people pay
more attention to Eleanor.” “Yes,” she said quietly, “so what
should I do?” Instead of groping for some facile solution, I
said, “That’s a tough question. You, Daddy, and I will give it
some serious thought.”
When we stood up, she threw her arms around my waist
and gave me a big hug, one that felt more needy than
grateful. I figured she needed some reassurance. I put my
arms around her and said, “No matter what, you know that
you’re our most precious, darling Eliza, and no one would
ever forget about you or think that someone else is more
important than you.”
“Come on, Eliza, let’s go see if my bread dough has
risen,” Jamie said. “You can punch it down.” She took his

hand and skipped off!
Experts say that denying bad feelings intensifies them;
acknowledging bad feelings allows good feelings to return.
That sure seemed to be what happened with Eliza. This
was a real happiness breakthrough: not only was this
approach more effective in soothing Eliza, it was far more
gratifying to me to act in a loving way, instead of giving in to
my impulse to act in a dismissive or argumentative way.
Jamie is skeptical of child-rearing “techniques,” and he
hasn’t glanced inside a book about parenting since he
tossed aside What to Expect When You’re Expecting after
the first chapter, but even he started to use this strategy. I
watched one morning when, after Eleanor threw herself,
kicking and screaming, onto the floor, he picked her up and
said soothingly, “You’re frustrated. You don’t want to wear
your shoes, you want to wear your ruby slippers.” And she

stopped crying.
BE A TREASURE HOUSE OF HAPPY MEMORIES.
Sometimes the importance of some bit of happinessrelated research or advice won’t hit me when I’m reading
about it; only later do I grasp that I stumbled across
something essential.
One piece of wisdom that didn’t resonate with me initially
was the importance of keeping happy memories vivid. But
as I mulled over this principle, I realized the tremendous
value of mementos that help prompt positive memories.

Studies show that recalling happy times helps boost
happiness in the present. When people reminisce, they
focus on positive memories, with the result that recalling the
past amplifies the positive and minimizes the negative.
However, because people remember events better when
they fit with their present mood, happy people remember
happy events better, and depressed people remember sad
events better. Depressed people have as many nice
experiences as other people—they just don’t recall them as
well.
With this knowledge in mind, I vowed to take steps to
help everyone in the family to experience happy times more
vividly. Jamie loves looking at photo albums and has a
secret sentimental streak for things like outgrown baby
clothes, but he’s not going to put in the time necessary to
pull memorabilia together. If I wanted a treasure house of
happy memories for my family, I needed to be the one to
build it.
I stopped resenting the tedious hours I spend maintaining
our family photo albums. I use these albums as a family
diary, to capture little family jokes or funny incidents as well
as the usual round of birthday party, Thanksgiving dinner,
and vacation scenes. Photos help me recall happy details
that once seemed unforgettable: how Jamie used to make
rice pudding all the time; how tiny our four-pound Eliza was
when she was born; and how Eleanor loved to show off her
belly button. Without photographs, would we remember the
fall afternoon when we wandered through Central Park with
Eliza dressed as a “lovely fairy” or Eleanor’s ecstasy the

first time we put her in a swing?
Not a chance.
Beyond the taking of photographs, another way to
accomplish this goal was to embrace my role as the family
reporter, to spread family cheer. We have two sets of
extremely engaged grandparents, and the two who live
around the corner are as eager for information as the pair
who lives in Kansas City. I made more of an effort to e-mail
informational notes with updates from the pediatrician’s
visit, reports on school events, or funny things that
happened. Now that I’m a parent myself, I realize how much
the happiness of parents depends on the happiness of their
children and grandchildren. By sending around a quick, fun
e-mail, I can give everyone in the family a lift (and also
myself—do good, feel good). As I’d learned in February,
even Jamie likes to get e-mails during the day with
interesting bits of family news.
With this in mind, when I joined Jamie in our bedroom
after tucking Eleanor in for the night, I said, “I don’t think I’ve
told you about Eleanor’s new good-night ritual. Now when
I’m done rocking Eleanor, I carry her to the window, and she
says, ‘Good night, world.’”
“Does she really?” he asked in a tender voice. Without
my resolution, I might never have bothered to mention it.
Resolving to be a “treasure house of happy memories”
also got me thinking about the importance of family
traditions. Family traditions make occasions feel special
and exciting. They mark the passage of time in a happy
way. They provide a sense of anticipation, security, and

continuity. Studies show that family traditions support
children’s social development and strengthen family
cohesiveness. They provide connection and predictability,
which people—especially children—crave. I know that I
enjoy a holiday more when I know exactly what we’re going
to do and when we’re going to do it.
At the same time, because family traditions usually
involve special decorations, special food, a special
sequence of events, and participation by certain people,
most traditions (other than the tradition of ordering a pizza
during the Super Bowl) involve a fair amount of trouble and
are a potential source of guilt, resentment, anger, and
disappointment.
I was right to start my happiness project with a focus on
energy. When I felt energetic, I enjoyed putting up
decorations, getting out the video camera, and all the rest.
When I felt low, everything seemed like a burden. Last year,
I kept putting off buying a pumpkin for Halloween, and we
ended up not getting one at all. Eliza and Eleanor didn’t
seem to mind, but I was shocked by myself. That counts as
Mommy malpractice in my book.
But even though we didn’t have a pumpkin, I did manage
to keep up our family’s personal Halloween tradition. Every
Halloween, I take a picture of Eliza and Eleanor in their
costumes, put the photo in a Halloween-themed picture
frame, and add it to our Halloween photo gallery. I also give
a copy to each pair of grandparents, so they have their own
set. This tradition takes a fair amount of effort, but it’s fun to
have a set of holiday photos that we put out for just one

week of the year, it gives a sense of family continuity, and
it’s an excuse to give a present to the grandparents—that’s
a lot of happiness bang for the buck.
My desire to be a treasure house of happy memories
gave rise, however, to a problem. I didn’t know what to do
with my children’s various keepsake papers, such as those
Halloween pictures. I wanted the girls to have their own
copies. Where should I put them? I also wanted both girls to
have a copy of their yearly birthday party invitations, the
family Valentine’s cards, family wedding invitations, class
photos, and so on—but where to keep all the stuff? Making
little stacks in out-of-the-way cabinets and pinning papers
to the bulletin board, as I’d been doing, wasn’t a good longterm solution.
A friend told me that she kept scrapbooks of such items
for each of her kids, but my heart sank at the thought. I was
barely keeping up with our family photo albums. Then my
Eighth Commandment started flashing inside my head:
“Identify the problem.” What was the problem? I wanted to
save all these mementos for Eliza and Eleanor, but I didn’t
know where to put them. I wanted a convenient,
inexpensive, attractive way to store them that would keep
them organized without taking up too much room.
Instead of moving various piles around the apartment, as
I usually did when confronted with this kind of problem, I
forced myself to sit and think. Convenient. Inexpensive.
Attractive. Organized. Paper storage.
And just like that, I thought of a solution. File boxes. I
bought two the very next day. Instead of buying ugly

cardboard file boxes, I splurged and bought a slightly
fancier version from an upscale office supply store. The
boxes were a pleasing tan color, covered with a woven
fabric, with proper wooden handles. I fitted out each one
with a pack of hanging files.
I started with Eliza. After gathering up a lot of loose
memorabilia from around the apartment, I made a folder for
each year of school, past and future, in which I put her
birthday party invitation, a copy of the photo I took each
year on the first day of school, the program from the school
holiday party, some characteristic work, our family
Valentine’s card, a camp photo, and so on. Then I did the
same with the few items I had for Eleanor.
These boxes make it easy to store these mementos
neatly, and they’ll make great keepsakes for the girls when
they’re older. How fun to imagine that when they’re fifty
years old, they’ll be able to look back at their birthday party
invitations from nursery school! I was so pleased with the
system that I started a box for Jamie and me too, divided
by year.
As I thought about the various traditions we observed, it
occurred to me that I didn’t need to wait for traditions to
emerge spontaneously. A “new tradition” may be a bit of an
oxymoron, but that shouldn’t stop me from inventing a
tradition that I wished we had.
Jamie came up with a great one: Polite Night. He
suggested that every Sunday night, we set the table
properly, enforce good manners, and have a nice meal
together. Calling it “Polite Night” was my brilliant stroke. It

turned out to be a very useful exercise and a lot of fun.
Also, when she was little, I’d started the tradition of Eliza
and her grandmother taking a weekly music class together,
and when Eleanor was old enough she started a weekly
class, too. Judy is deeply involved in music and theater,
and having this weekly date means that grandmother and
granddaughter see each other at least once a week, in a
context that allows Judy to impart her enthusiasm for music
to the girls. Then I thought—what about their grandfather?
He needed a grandchild tradition of his own, so I invented
one. I proposed that a few times each year, during her
vacations, Eliza would visit her grandfather at his office for
lunch. He thought it was a terrific idea, and these lunches
have been a great success.
I have no idea how Jamie and I started this, but we have
a family tradition of yelling “Family love sandwich!” and
scooping up the girls in a big tight hug. Our version of a
secret handshake.
I wondered what traditions other people might observe,
so on my blog, I asked readers for ideas from their families.
Some of my favorites:

W hen I was a kid and wanted my three younger sisters to
help me clean the house—I invented a game called
“Cleaning Company.” (I had no idea there actually were
such companies.) I’d pretend the phone was ringing
(“Prrring! Prrring!”) with hand to ear holding an invisible
receiver. (“Hello, Cleaning Company. What’s that you say?

You need us to come over right now and clean your house
for a party? We’ll be right over, ma’am.”) Then, I’d clap my
hands together excitedly and announce to my sisters,
“Sounds like another job for Cleaning Company!” We’d
pretend to pile into an imaginary car and drive over to our
living room (“vroomvrooming” all around the house first—we
were all still in elementary school so this was pretty fun for
us). Then, we’d start cleaning whichever room we’d been
assigned to briskly while repeatedly singing, “Cleaning
Company! Cleaning Company! Woo woo!” with a raise of
our hands (or feet if our hands were full) with every “Woo
woo!” Pretty crazy, huh?
As a micro family—single mom of one kid—the little
traditions are extra important to us because a lot of
“normal” falls between the cracks. We have “adventures”
regularly—it started off when my daughter was very small
and it was to glamourize our errands. Now, we plan it out a
bit—a map or agenda to pick the route, bring along the
camera, “adventure” clothes (my daughter loves hats), and
a snack or dish we haven’t had before.
When my husband and I travel away from our children, we
like to bring home little presents. But instead of just handing
them over when we return, I make sure to pick the presents
early in the trip, then allow my children to ask for clues.
Each child gets one clue per day, and they have
tremendous fun coming up with the questions, coordinating

with each other about who will ask what, keeping a list of
the clues that have been revealed, debating amongst
themselves, etc. The gift itself brings them much less fun
than the guessing game.
My brother has a tradition with his family. Every once in a
while, they have “Pirate Dinner.” They cover the table
entirely in newspaper and eat with no plates, napkins, or
utensils—just hands! He says that his kids have to follow
rules and proper table etiquette all the time, so why not give
them a break every now and then?
I couldn’t wait to suggest Pirate Dinner to my girls. What
a great idea.
TAKE TIME FOR PROJECTS.
Traditions often involve projects. Celebrating every family
birthday, sending out a family Valentine’s card, decorating
an elaborate gingerbread house (actually, we make the
houses out of graham crackers and tubs of Duncan Hines
frosting)—these things are fun, but they take time, energy,
planning, and patience. Inevitably, boomerang errands are
involved. Out of the urge to simplify my life, I sometimes feel
reluctant to undertake ambitious family projects, but at the
same time, I know that these projects are a highlight of
childhood—and adulthood.
Once I’d resolved to “Take time for projects,” I made a

purchase that I’d been considering for a long time: I
ordered a laminator. The minute it arrived, I knew it had
been worth the splurge. So many possible projects! First
up: Mother’s Day presents for the grandmothers. Under my
direction, Eliza made a list of “Ten Reasons I Love Bunny”
(her nickname for my mother) and “Ten Reasons I Love
Grandma.” As she dictated, I typed up her list; then she
chose a different font for each item—playing with fonts on
my computer is one of her favorite things to do. Then we
printed the two lists out and let Eleanor scribble on them, to
add her personal touch. And then to the laminator!
Suddenly these modest pieces of paper were transformed
into personalized place mats. What next? Book covers,
bookmarks, cards of useful phone numbers.
Inspired by the success of the laminator, I experimented
with the glue gun that I’d had for years but never used. An
opportunity presented itself one evening when, after
Eleanor had gone to sleep, Eliza announced that she was
supposed to make a “scrappy cap” to bring to school.
“What’s a scrappy cap?” I asked.
“It’s from Julie Andrews Edwards’s book, The Last of the
Really Great Whangdoodles,” Eliza explained. “It’s a hat
that reflects our imagination.”
Now, in this situation, I knew perfectly well that as a
parent, I should let my child take the lead while I merely
helped gently and unobtrusively to guide her thinking.
But instead of doing that, I leaped to my feet and said, “I
know what to do! Quick, run and get a baseball cap.”
While she ran to get a hat, I studied the glue gun

directions and plugged it in. Then I pulled down the jars of
little bitty toys that I’d collected in January.
“Now what?” panted Eliza as she arrived with her cap.
“Dump out the stuff in the jars and see what reflects your
imagination. Then we’ll glue them onto this cap with a glue
gun.”
“Oh, I love glue guns,” she said. “My teacher uses them.”
Eliza began combing through the mounds of toys to pick
her favorites. One by one, we carefully glued them onto the
hat.
“I didn’t expect this to be so fun,” Eliza said happily at
one point. It took hours because she wanted to debate the
merits of every single gimcrack, but that was fine. Take

time for projects.
Sometimes family projects pop up unexpectedly. For
example, I didn’t expect picking Eliza’s birthday cake to
turn into a “project.” I figured that I’d ask, as I’d asked
before, “Chocolate or vanilla? Flower decorations or
princesses?” and Eliza would choose. Instead, as Eliza’s
birthday approached, she became utterly preoccupied with
her cake. The guest list, the decorations, the activities—all
these considerations paled in comparison to the question
of the composition and decoration of the cake. Before my
happiness project, I would have pressed her to decide
quickly, so I could get the item crossed off my to-do list. But
my research revealed that a key to happiness is squeezing
out as much happiness as possible from a happy event.
We’ve all heard of Dr. Elisabeth Kübler-Ross’s five

stages of grief: denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and
acceptance. By contrast, I realized, happiness has four
stages. To eke out the most happiness from an experience,
we must anticipate it, savor it as it unfolds, express
happiness, and recall a happy memory.
Any single happy experience may be amplified or
minimized, depending on how much attention you give it.
For instance, if I call my parents to tell them about a funny
thing that happened in the park that day, I relive the
experience in my mind as I express it. Although it’s true that
taking photographs sometimes makes it hard to savor a
moment when it’s happening, in the future, having pictures
will help me recall a happy time.
Eliza’s birthday cake gave us plenty of opportunities to
enjoy the “anticipation” stage. She asked me to bring home
a Baskin-Robbins brochure, and we went over every word.
We visited the Baskin-Robbins Web site, where Eliza
pondered the list of ice cream flavors. We made a
pilgrimage to the Baskin-Robbins store, so Eliza could
sample the flavors and pore over the book of possible cake
decorations. At last, I thought, she’d made her decisions.
Nope.
“Mom,” she asked a few days later, “can we go back to
Baskin-Robbins to look at the cake book again?”
“Eliza, we spent an hour in there already. Plus your
birthday is still a month away.”
“But I want to look at the book!”
Before the happiness project, I would have resisted, but
now I understand now that this errand isn’t birthday party

inefficiency but the very fun itself. It’s my Sixth
Commandment: Enjoy the process. Eliza will enjoy eating
the cake for only five minutes, but she can have hours of
enjoyment from planning the cake. In fact, in what’s known
as “rosy prospection,” anticipation of happiness is
sometimes greater than the happiness actually
experienced. All the more reason to revel in anticipation.
“Okay,” I relented, “if you want, we can stop off after
school on Friday.”
Doing these kinds of projects showed me another way
that children boost happiness: they reconnect us with
sources of “feeling good” that we’ve outgrown. Left to my
own devices, I wouldn’t work on homemade Mother’s Day
gifts, pore over Baskin-Robbins cake designs, memorize Is
Your Mama a Llama?, or go to the Central Park boat pond
on Saturday afternoons. I wouldn’t watch Shrek over and
over or listen to Laurie Berkner’s music. I wouldn’t visit
amusement parks or the Museum of Natural History. I
wouldn’t use food coloring to make Rainbow Yogurt
Surprise in a shot glass. Nevertheless, I honestly do enjoy
these activities with my children. I don’t just enjoy their
pleasure—which I do, and that also makes me happy—I
also experience my own sincere enjoyment of activities that
I would otherwise never have considered.
On the last day of April, as I did at the end of every month, I
paused to evaluate my progress before gearing up for the
next month’s resolutions. Soul-searching seems like an

activity that should be undertaken by a woodland stream or
at least in a quiet room, but this particular session of selfevaluation took place as I was riding the subway downtown.
As we slowly lurched through the local stops, I asked
myself, “Well, am I feeling any happier? Am I really?”
I happened to be in a blue mood that morning. “If I’m
honest with myself,” I thought dejectedly, “the fact is, I’m no
different. Same old Gretchen, no better and no worse,
nothing new and improved. I’ve been telling myself I’m
happier, but I haven’t really changed.” Studies show that
people who go to psychotherapy or to programs to lose
weight, stop smoking, start exercising, or whatever usually
believe they’ve changed a lot but in fact show only a
modest benefit; apparently, after spending so much money,
time, and effort, people think, “Wow, I must have changed
for the better,” even if they haven’t changed that much.
“That’s probably why I’ve been telling myself that I’m
happier,” I thought, “when in fact my project hasn’t been
working at all.” As I got off the subway, I couldn’t shake my
feelings of futility and gloom.
After a two-hour meeting, I was back on the subway and
headed home in a more cheerful mood (thus confirming
happiness research that shows that people get a mood
boost from contact with others). I resumed my argument
with myself. “Am I happier?” This time my answer was a
little different: “No, but also yes.” True, my fundamental
nature hadn’t changed. It wasn’t realistic to think that I could
bring about that kind of change in just four months or even

by the end of the year. Yet something had changed. What?
Finally I put my finger on it. In moments when I was in
“neutral,” as when riding the subway, I was the same
familiar Gretchen. The difference was that, although my
nature was unchanged, I had more happiness in my life
each day; my resolutions had added more sources of fun,
engagement, and satisfaction and had also eliminated
some significant sources of bad feelings, such as guilt and
anger. Through my actions, I was successfully pushing
myself to the high end of my inborn happiness range.
I could tell that my happier mood affected the household
atmosphere. It’s true that “if Mama ain’t happy, ain’t nobody
happy,” and it’s also true that “if Daddy ain’t happy, ain’t
nobody happy” and that “you’re only as happy as your least
happy child.” Each member of a family picks up and
reflects everyone else’s emotions—but of course I could
change no one’s actions except my own.
On a less sublime note, after evaluating my progress I
decided to give up wearing the pedometer. It had been a
useful exercise, but I was getting tired of strapping it to my
waistband every morning, and I’d almost dropped it in the
toilet several times. The pedometer had served its purpose
of helping me to evaluate and improve my walking habits,
and it was time to put it into retirement.

5
MAY
Be Serious About Play

LEISURE

Find more fun.
Take time to be silly.
Go off the path.
Start a collection.

May, the

beginning of springtime, seemed like the right
time to work on my play—that is, the activities I did in my
free time because I wanted to do them, for their own sake,
for my own reasons, and not for money or ambition. In an
irony that didn’t escape me, I prepared to work doggedly at
fun and to be serious about joking around.
The writer Jean Stafford scoffed, “Happy people don’t
need to have fun,” but in fact, studies show that the absence
of feeling bad isn’t enough to make you happy; you must
strive to find sources of feeling good. One way to feel good
is to make time for play—which researchers define as an
activity that’s very satisfying, has no economic significance,
doesn’t create social harm, and doesn’t necessarily lead to

praise or recognition. Research shows that regularly having
fun is a key factor in having a happy life; people who have
fun are twenty times as likely to feel happy.
I had two goals for the month: I wanted to have more fun,
and I wanted to use my leisure to cultivate my creativity.
Play wasn’t merely idle time but an opportunity to
experiment with new interests and to draw closer to other
people.
I was very fortunate that the activities that I did for work
were, for the most part, versions of the same activities that I
did for fun. There were many persuasive arguments against
taking busman’s holidays, but I always wanted to do the
same things on the weekend that I did during the week. I
knew exactly what the photographer Edward Weston meant
when he noted in his daybook that he’d spent the day in “a
holiday of work, but work which was play.”
As I saw in March, novelty is an important source of
happiness; it’s also an important element in creativity. I tend
to stick to the familiar, so I wanted to push myself toward
new experiences and new ideas that attracted me.
I needed to take my leisure more seriously. I’d always
assumed that having fun was something in my life that
would flow naturally, so I didn’t think about shaping it or
getting the most out of it—but although having fun sounded
simple, it wasn’t. When I asked my blog readers about their
ideas about fun, several readers responded.

Making things is something that I get fun out of. I’m a great

fan of crafts, but I find the fun is far increased when I am
making a present for someone. This Christmas, I have a
pretty ambitious project in mind for the boyfriend, but I know
he’ll love it and the challenge is giving me so much fun, as
well as the anticipation that he’ll appreciate it. Coming up
with ideas myself is an intellectual challenge, followed by
the mechanically creative challenge of realising them, and
this is a combination which I find very fulfilling and fun.
Reading overseas blogs, including yours of course, is fun
to me. Every weekday morning I read them over coffee
(since I live in the Far East, they are updated while I’m
asleep). Needless to say, it helps to learn foreign language
(in my case, English). But what I find fun most is to find a
person who has a similar taste, way of thinking, etc., in a
different culture.
Books are a great source of joy and fun for me—
collecting them, reading them, looking them up on the
internet. It gives me great pleasure to open a “new” book
whether it was previously used or fresh off the press.
My weekly Latin class is a whole lot of fun for me. I have
been meeting for four years now with a few other
individuals to sight-read Latin, review grammar, and talk
about whatever comes up in conversation. I fell in love with
the Latin language in high school and never had the
opportunity to pursue further study until now. And that has

made me very, very happy.
What’s fun for me? ANYTHING creative…anything! The
BEST fun is the kind of coloring book that has a very
complex picture on only one side of the page…and a new
box of beautifully sharpened colored pencils. Next best…a
piece of stamped material and the colored cotton floss
required to complete the embroidery.
Here’s a tough one: I do not find it particularly fun to sit on
the floor and play with my children with their toys. I love
cooking with them, reading to them, talking to them,
watching movies with them, going on walks with them, and
taking them to age-appropriate places. My idea of a really
good time is to pick my five-year-old up from school and go
out for a snack. But I don’t find playing with Polly Pockets
(with the older one) or Little People (with the younger one)
particularly fun. And I feel very guilty about that at times.
For me fun is…debating, tinkering (e.g., inside the guts
of hardware or software), building (hardware/software),
reading blogs (all kinds), telling my kids stories of my youth.
Seriously, I have come to the realisation that I don’t have
fun anymore. I have got to do something about this before I
become a glum, boring, sad person!

Like that last commenter, I wanted to bring more fun into
my life.
FIND MORE FUN.
When I thought about fun, I realized to my surprise that I
didn’t have a good sense of what I found fun. Only recently
had I grasped one of my most important Secrets of
Adulthood: just because something was fun for someone
else didn’t mean it was fun for me—and vice versa. There
are many things that other people enjoy that I don’t.
I love the idea of playing chess, going to a lecture on
international markets, doing crossword puzzles, getting a
pedicure, eating dinner at a hot new restaurant, or having a
subscription to the opera or season tickets to the Knicks. I
can see exactly why other people enjoy these activities. I
wish I enjoyed them. But I don’t. Some blog readers
experienced the same tension:

Over the last few years, I’ve started figuring out what I really
find fun. I realized I had a lot of stuff and activities in my life
that I didn’t enjoy. These were things that others find fun, but
they just weren’t to me. Accepting that what others find fun
won’t necessarily be fun for me felt like a huge
breakthrough. It’s hard enough to stay in touch with what’s
fun for you without thinking that you should like something
that others find fun. For instance, I enjoy movies, but there

are cheaper activities that I enjoy much more. So, I have
gradually cut them out of my life. I will go occasionally with a
friend, but I don’t watch nearly as many as I used to and I
used to watch a couple a week.
My husband posed this question to me a year or so ago
—“What do you find fun?” and I had to think long and hard
about it. Most of my pleasures are quiet and solitary. I love
to be absorbed in a good book; I love to do needlework; I
love to make jewelry. I’ve given myself permission to say
that that’s okay. I do love to play board games, though,
especially with my children.
My understanding of fun is definitely not the same as
other people’s. I enjoy solitary, quiet things. Even the sports
I enjoy are quiet ones. Reading is fun, both books and
blogs. Computer programming is fun. Diving and mountain
climbing are fun. Yoga is fun. Shopping, on the other hand,
which girls are supposed to enjoy, is definitely NOT fun.
Parties are generally not fun either.
I tended to overrate the fun activities that I didn’t do and
underrate my own inclinations. I felt like the things that other
people enjoyed were more valuable, or more cultured…
more, well, legitimate. But now it was time to “Be
Gretchen.” I needed to acknowledge to myself what I
enjoyed, not what I wished I enjoyed. If something was really
fun for me, it would pass this test: I looked forward to it; I

found it energizing, not draining; and I didn’t feel guilty
about it later.
I told a friend about my quest, and she said, “Gosh, if I
had something fun I wanted to do, I’d feel frustrated,
because I wouldn’t have time for it. I don’t want to add
anything else to my plate.” This struck me as a bleak view
—but it was something I might well have said myself in the
past. My happiness project had shown me that I was better
off saying “I have plenty of time to have fun!”
But what, exactly, did I find fun? What did I want to do? I
couldn’t think of much. Well, there was one thing: I really
loved reading children’s literature. I’ve never quite figured
out what I get from children’s literature that I don’t get from
adult literature, but there’s something. The difference
between novels for adults and novels for children isn’t
merely a matter of cover design, bookstore placement, and
the age of the protagonist. It’s a certain quality of
atmosphere.
Children’s literature often deals openly with the most
transcendent themes, such as the battle between good and
evil and the supreme power of love. These books don’t
gloss over the horror and fascination of evil, but in the end,
in even the most realistic novels, good triumphs. Novelists
for adults don’t usually write that way; perhaps they fear
being seen as sentimental or priggish or simplistic. Instead,
they focus on guilt, hypocrisy, the perversion of good
intentions, the cruel workings of fate, social criticism, the
slipperiness of language, the inevitability of death, sexual
passion, unjust accusation, and the like. These are grand

literary themes. Yet I also find it enormously satisfying to
see good prevail over evil, to see virtue vindicated and
wrongdoing punished. I love didactic writing, whether by
Tolstoy or Madeleine L’Engle.
What’s more, in keeping with this good-versus-evil
worldview, children’s literature often plunges a reader into a
world of archetypes. Certain images have a queer power to
excite the imagination, and children’s literature uses them
with brilliant effect. Books such as Peter Pan, The Golden
Compass, and The Blue Bird operate on a symbolic level
and are penetrated with meanings that can’t be fully worked
out. Adult novels do sometimes have this atmosphere, but
it’s much rarer. I love to return to the world of stark good
and evil, of talking animals and fulfilled prophecies.
But my passionate interest in kidlit didn’t fit with my ideas
of what I wished I were like; it wasn’t grown up enough. I
wanted to be interested in serious literature, constitutional
law, the economy, art, and other adult subjects. And I am
interested in those topics, but I somehow felt embarrassed
by my love of J. R. R. Tolkien, E. L. Konigsberg, and
Elizabeth Enright. I repressed this side of my personality to
such a degree that when one of the Harry Potter books
came out, I didn’t buy it for several days. I’d fooled even
myself into thinking that I didn’t care.
If I was going to “Be serious about play,” I needed to
embrace this suppressed passion and have more fun with
it. But how? While I was trying to figure that out, I had lunch
with an acquaintance who was a polished, intimidating,

well-established literary agent. We were having a “we’d like
to become friends but haven’t figured out how yet” kind of
conversation when I mentioned how much I loved Stephen
King’s The Stand. Now, I felt as though this was a bit of a
risk, because I feared she might be the kind of person who
would disdain Stephen King.
“I love Stephen King, and I love The Stand,” she said.
Then she added, “But it’s not as good as Harry Potter.”
“Oh, do you like Harry Potter?”
“I’m obsessed with Harry Potter.”
Eureka, I’d found a kindred spirit. We talked about
nothing but Harry Potter for the rest of lunch. As we talked, it
occurred to me: I knew a third person who also loved
children’s literature. Could we start a book group?
“Let me float an idea by you,” I said tentatively as we
were paying. “Do you think you might want to start a
children’s literature reading group?”
“A reading group, for reading children’s books? Like
what?”
“Whatever we want. The Giver, The Secret Garden,
James and the Giant Peach, whatever. We could take
turns meeting for dinner.”
“Sure, that could be fun,” she said enthusiastically.
Fortunately. If she’d said no, I’m not sure I would have
asked anyone else. “I have a friend who might be interested
in joining, too.”
So I sent out a few e-mails and started asking around.
Once I spoke up, I was startled to discover that I already

knew and liked many people who shared my passion.
Because I’d never mentioned my interest, I’d never known
about theirs.
For our first meeting, I sent around an e-mail inviting
everyone to my apartment for dinner to discuss C. S.
Lewis’s The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. At the end
of the e-mail, I included a quotation from Lewis’s brilliant
essay “On Three Ways of Writing for Children”:
When I was ten, I read fairy tales in secret and would have
been ashamed if I had been found doing so. Now that I am
fifty I read them openly. When I became a man I put away
childish things, including the fear of childishness and the
desire to be very grown up.
This apologia didn’t mean much to anyone else in the
group, because they’d never tried to squash their interest in
children’s literature. Why had I? No more.
From our very first meeting, this group was a huge
source of fun for me. I loved the people, I loved the books, I
loved the discussions. I loved the fact that many of the
people in the group didn’t have children, so there was no
question about the fact that we were reading children’s
literature for ourselves. I loved our kidlit tradition that the
dinner’s host must serve some food that tied in with the
book. This started when I served Turkish delight for dessert
at the first meeting, because Turkish delight plays a
significant role in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.
At our next meeting, we drank Tokay, the wine that appears

at a key moment in Philip Pullman’s The Golden Compass
(I was surprised to discover that Tokay was real; I’d
assumed it was part of Lyra’s world). For Lewis Carroll’s
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, we ate mock turtle
soup and treacle tart; for Blue Balliett’s Chasing Vermeer,
the blue M&M’s that are the signature candy eaten by Petra
and Calder; for Louisa May Alcott’s Little Women, Meg’s
blancmange, which Jo takes to Laurie the first time they
meet. At the dinner to discuss Louis Sachar’s Holes, we
ate Dunkin’ Donuts doughnut holes—for the pun.
Studies show that each common interest between
people boosts the chances of a lasting relationship and
also brings about a 2 percent increase in life satisfaction.
This group gave me a bunch of new friends and a lift in life
satisfaction that felt much higher than 2 percent. Also, it
was fun just being part of a new group. Group membership
makes people feel closer and brings a significant boost in
personal confidence and happiness.
By contrast, around the same time, I was elected to the
Council on Foreign Relations. Interesting subject,
interesting group, and so very legitimate. Which group
brought me more pleasure? Which helped me form new
relationships? Kidlit. I’m passionate about Winston
Churchill, I’m passionate about John Kennedy, but the truth
is, I’m not passionate about foreign relations—so that
group didn’t form as solid a basis for fun for me.
So once again, one of my resolutions led me right back
to my First Commandment: “Be Gretchen.” I had to know

and pursue what was truly fun for me. That was the road
that led to happiness. But what else, beside the children’s
literature reading group, could I do for fun? I was stumped.
Was I so cheerless and dull that I couldn’t think of a single
other thing?
One thing that’s both good and bad about living in New
York City is the sense that I could be doing so much—going
to the ballet, going to an off-off-Broadway play, taking a
graphic design class, shopping in Williamsburg, eating in
Astoria. But I almost never do those things, so the
possibilities are exciting, but also a reproach. I’ve been
haunted for years by a public ser vice poster I saw just one
time, in the subway. It was a photo of a Chinese food takeout container sitting on top of two videos. The caption read,
“If this is how you spend your time, why are you living in
New York?”
Fun abounded in New York City, if only I had the
largeness of spirit to tap into it.
I told a friend that I was trying to have more fun, and
instead of pointing me toward the “Goings On About Town”
column in The New Yorker, she asked me a question:
“What did you like to do when you were a child? What you
enjoyed as a ten-year-old is probably something you’d
enjoy now.”
That was an intriguing idea. I remembered that Carl
Jung, when he was thirty-eight years old, had decided to
start playing with building blocks again, to tap into the
enthusiasm he’d felt as an eleven-year-old. What had I
done for fun as a child? No chess, no ice-skating, no

painting. I worked on my “Blank Books.” For my tenth
birthday, my uncle had given me a book that looked like an
ordinary book but with blank pages, titled Blank Book. Now
such books can be bought anywhere, but when I got this
one, I’d never seen anything like it. Before long, I’d bought
several more.
I turned my Blank Books into commonplace books filled
with clippings, memorabilia, notes from school friends,
cartoons, lists, snatches of information that interested me.
Jokes cut from my grandparents’ back copies of Reader’s
Digest sometimes found their way in. A special series of
my Blank Books were illustrated books of quotations. Every
time I read a quotation I liked, I’d write it on a slip of paper,
and when I saw a picture in a magazine that I liked, I’d cut it
out, and I created my books by matching the quotations to
the pictures.
Keeping up with my Blank Books was the main leisure
activity of my childhood. Every day after school, I sat on the
floor sorting, cutting, matching, copying, and pasting while I
watched TV.
I set off to replicate this experience. I was eager to give it
a try, plus I’d thought of another potential benefit: I’d noticed
that many of the most creative people are inveterate
keepers of scrapbooks, inspiration boards, or other
magpie creations. Twyla Tharp, for example, dedicates a
file box to every project she begins, and as she works on
the dance, she fills the box with the material that inspired
her. Having some kind of physical way of preserving

information keeps good ideas vivid and creates
unexpected juxtapositions.
I bought a huge scrapbook and started looking for items
to include. A motley assortment emerged: a portrait of
Princess Diana made of tiny photographs of flowers; a
review from The New York Review of Books about Books
of Hours; a photograph of an artwork by Portia Munson
called Pink Project (1994), made of a table covered by
pink objects; a map of the counties of England, which I
wished I’d had when I was writing my Churchill biography;
one playing card from the pack I took from my
grandparents’ house after they both died, decorated with a
Thomas Kinkade–like picture of a water mill.
Working on my new Blank Book made me look at
magazines and newspapers in a different way. If something
caught my attention, I’d think, “Why am I looking at this for a
second time? Is it worth keeping for my Blank Book?” I was
a less passive recipient of information. I also liked the
process of cutting, placing, and pasting, so familiar from my
childhood.
All this thinking about fun made me realize that I had to
make time for it. Too often, I’d give up fun in order to work. I
often felt so overwhelmed by tasks that I’d think, “The most
fun would be to cross some items off my to-do list. I’d feel
so much better if I could get something accomplished.” I felt
virtuous when I delayed gluing pictures into my scrapbook
in order to deal with my e-mail.
In fact, though, turning from one chore to another just
made me feel trapped and drained. When I took the time to

do something that was truly fun for me, to reread The
Phantom Tollbooth for the fifteenth time, for instance, or to
call my sister, I felt better able to tackle my to-do list. Fun is
energizing.
But I have to admit it—being Gretchen and accepting my
true likes and dislikes bring me a kind of sadness. I will
never visit a jazz club at midnight, hang out in artists’
studios, jet off to Paris for the weekend, or pack up to go
fly-fishing on a spring dawn. I won’t be admired for my chic
wardrobe or be appointed to a high government office. I’ll
never stand in line to buy tickets to the Ring Cycle. I love
fortune cookies and refuse to try foie gras.
It makes me sad for two reasons. First, it makes me sad
to realize my limitations. The world offers so much!—so
much beauty, so much fun, and I am unable to appreciate
most of it. But it also makes me sad because, in many
ways, I wish I were different. One of my Secrets of
Adulthood is “You can choose what you do; you can’t
choose what you like to do.” I have a lot of notions about
what I wish I liked to do, about the subjects and occupations
that I wish interested me. But it doesn’t matter what I wish I
were like. I am Gretchen.
When I posted on my blog about the “sadness of a
happiness project,” I was astounded by the response. I’d
thought it unlikely that my sentiments would resonate with
anyone else, but dozens of people commented.

This post really resonates with me. Because this is exactly

what’s been on my mind lately.
I’m currently going through a period of major change, and
as always, they make you think.
And I realize, I will never be an astronaut. I will never know
what it’s like to be someone else, live a different life. Like
you say, the world is so big, and I wonder if I’m missing out.
I will never be an F-1 racer. I will never be a supermodel. I
will never know what it’s like to fight in a war. To be a
dancer on a cruise ship. To be a dealer in Las Vegas.
Not because they are entirely impossible to achieve. But
because I can’t dance (I tried). I can’t take G forces (I can’t
even ride a roller coaster). I am not tall or pretty enough. I
hate physics and maths, so I can’t be an astronaut.
This is less about whether I CAN actually do any of those
things, but more about whether I’d actually want to do them.
Or to be dedicated enough to work towards them.
I will never be that person.
It has taken me decades to even accept that the
hairstyles I like can’t be done with my actual hair.
I don’t remember the exact date, but I remember the
incident very clearly:
One day—I was about 34 years old—it dawned on me: I
can DO ANYTHING I want, but I can’t DO EVERYTHING I
want.
Life-changing.

I think most of us feel the same way. I’m a college
student, majoring in English and trying to figure out what
path to take. I’m an English major because I like to read.
There are so many things I can do that involve books, but
I’m undecided. I think almost daily I grieve for my limitations
(I will probably never set foot in any club), but my passions
give me such joy.
I followed your lead and one of my commandments is to
“Be Catherine.” I would rather spend the night reading a
great book than dancing in a club, I love children’s books
and check out dozens every time I go to the library. I think
by knowing who we are as people and being ourselves, we
can start making the world better.
I remember when I turned 25, and realised I’d never be a
Rhodes Scholar. The fact that I’d never wanted to be such,
never applied or even looked into it, was beside the point. It
was the closing of an option. I’m now looking down the
barrel of not having the opportunity to have children. Always
thought I’d think about it/decide what I wanted when I met
my future husband. Still haven’t met him (if he exists!) but
time waits for no ovary.
It’s part of being human, isn’t it? And more particularly so
in the world we live in—we see so much of what other
people do, have, are…But then there’s the majority of
humanity who have SO MUCH LESS than us—we are the
rich, privileged west. That usually sobers me up when I start
comparing my material situation to that of others who have

X Y or Z.
I look at people ten years younger than me earning 6figure incomes in corporate jobs and I think “I wish I wanted
to do that,” but I’m an artist at heart and my path to financial
security is a different one. I fought it for years and was
insanely unhappy. Now I’m following the artistic path, am flat
broke, worry about money nearly all the time, but am
insanely happy (except when I get the moments of wishing I
could make life easier for myself and follow the crowd).
It’s so true…and I do think about those things sometimes,
especially as I’m getting older. There are no “do overs” and
some things just aren’t going to happen. It does make me a
little sad sometimes. I just have to embrace what is.:)
I relate to what you say here, more than I’d like to admit.
I’d like to be this really cool, easygoing person who gets
along with everyone, but that isn’t me—not really. I don’t feel
comfortable in strange situations and I get more uptight
about things than I like, and I make friends slowly. I WANT
to be different and am pretty good at pretending, but it can
be hard to deny that inside I am shy. In the same way, I’d
like my husband to change, sometimes, and I have to
remind myself that is unfair and unrealistic. Plus I love him,
just the way he is.
I actually lost a friendship because I couldn’t tell the

difference between what I sometimes wished I was and
what I was actually willing to become. I always had a touch
of envy for those women who go out, in grand style,
enjoying their cosmopolitans and discussing high fashion. I
had a friend, however, who actually became that, and
decided she was no longer interested in me because I
didn’t become that person. I wonder to this day if I am
partially to blame for that, as I probably led her to believe
that I was willing to go in that direction.
But the thing is…when given the choice, I’d much rather
stay home. I’m such a homebody, and I really don’t enjoy
crowds, bars, or getting all dolled up, to be honest. Thanks
for this post…it makes me realize that perhaps I can learn
to be ok with being me…just as I am.
Ah, the constant tug between striving and accepting. I’ve
never figured this out, except to say that it seems like a
balance of necessary opposites. And yes it can be sad,
while being busy and running out and fulfilling all things on
my dreams/desires list I am not just accepting myself as is
and letting me be me as is. I’m pushing myself. And yet if I
don’t push myself I find I can be dissatisfied with things
about me and my life. I figure there is a time for both
pursuing and accepting.
For me, I always wanted to start my own business. I
pursued the idea of “being a businessman.” However,
whenever I tried to do things I thought businessmen “should”

do, I would not be really happy. I would read certain
magazines or do different things. Instead I try and make no
plan on how to be a businessman and just do what sounds
interesting, appealing, or “feels” like the right next step. I
find I am still trending in a direction towards starting my own
tech business but in a different way than I thought I should
and it feels great at every step. Looking back, I feel the
things I “should” have done were not the things that brought
me towards my goal anyway and were taking me away
from it (and wasting a ton of time).
You also mention the idea of regret for not appreciating
something that you think must have some beauty, which you
cannot see. I understand this as well, but maybe instead of
focusing your mind on this, you look at those things that do
have a beauty to you now and look at them more and more.
Everything has its own beauty. Some appeal to us more
than others.
Our lives are in the space between Isaiah Berlin’s “We
are doomed to choose and every choice may entail an
irreparable loss” and Borges’s Garden of Forking Paths,
where every choice produces a quantum explosion of
alternate futures. Ich bin ein Berliner for the most part, have
a hard time seeing past the irreparable losses.
Seeing this response was comforting. I realized that just
as clearing away my nostalgic clutter and my aspirational
clutter in January had opened up more space for the

possessions I really use in the present, relinquishing my
fantasies of what I wished I found fun allowed me more
room to do the things that I did find fun. Why worry about
jazz clubs when I really wanted to design my own Book of
Hours? Be Gretchen.
TAKE TIME TO BE SILLY.
Preoccupied with my work, distracted by my running mental
to-do lists, I’d become more humorless than I used to be.
Many of my resolutions were aimed at gaining control of my
temper, but that wasn’t enough. A happy atmosphere isn’t
created merely by the absence of nagging and yelling but
also by jokes, games, and tomfoolery.
One day while I was trying to prod everyone to put the
groceries away as efficiently as possible, Jamie started
showing off his juggling prowess with three oranges. Eliza
and Eleanor were thrilled. I was annoyed.
“Come on, team!” I scolded. “Let’s get this done. Jamie,
put those oranges away and get the other bag.” But we
weren’t in any hurry—only later did it occur to me that I
should have enjoyed the moment and allowed the chore to
be fun. Had I really become such a killjoy? The next time we
were all unpacking groceries, I used two clementines to
make goggle eyes at Eleanor and Eliza. They screamed
with delight, Jamie laughed, and the groceries eventually
got put away.
Studies show that in a phenomenon called “emotional

contagion,” we unconsciously catch emotions from other
people—whether good moods or bad ones. Taking the
time to be silly means that we’re infecting one another with
good cheer, and people who enjoy silliness are one third
more likely to be happy.
As I went through my day, I looked for opportunities to
see the ridiculous side of things, to enter into the spirit of
Eliza and Eleanor’s play, and to goof around. Instead of
getting impatient when Eleanor wants to play the game
“Where’s Eleanor?” for the millionth time, I should try to
have as much fun as she’s having.
GO OFF THE PATH.
Diana Vreeland said, “The eye must travel.” One of the
things I admire most about my mother is her
adventurousness—she’s always eager to go new places
and have new experiences; she’s not intimidated by new
situations; she’s constantly developing new areas of miniexpertise just because she’s interested in something. I
wanted to be more like that, and my resolution to “Go off the
path” was meant to push me to encounter the unexpected
thoughts, unfamiliar scenes, new people, and
unconventional juxtapositions that are key sources of
creative energy—and happiness. Instead of always
worrying about being efficient, I wanted to spend time on
exploration, experimentation, digression, and failed
attempts that didn’t always look productive. But how should

I do this?
In addition to the major interests that became the
subjects of my books, I had lesser interests that I often
shoved aside to concentrate on my “official” subjects. So,
for instance, because I was working on my happiness
project, I allowed myself to read anything related to
happiness, but I ignored my extraneous interests. Now I
wanted to goad myself into exploring these neglected
byways. I discovered, however, that I’d been so diligent
about ignoring these interests that I couldn’t call any to mind
when I tried to pursue them. I started keeping an “Interest
Log” to get a better sense of what naturally caught my
attention. When I read a newspaper article with special
curiosity, stopped to look at a book in the bookstore, or
became particularly engaged in a conversation, I noted the
subject in my log.
A hodgepodge emerged: Saint Thérèse of Lisieux,
obesity, cognitive bias, Francis Galton, organ donation,
winter counts, Joseph Cornell, biography, people’s
relationships with objects, child development, photography,
Zen koans, any kind of character analysis, methods of
presentation of information, book design, and artists from
the Golden Age of Illustration. I soon lost interest in my
Interest Log, but I did push myself to pursue anything that
caught my attention, to read at whim. I read Christopher
Alexander’s A Pattern Language, Edward Tufte’s The
Visual Display of Quantitative Information, the complete
essays of George Orwell, Scott McCloud’s Understanding

Comics, the letters of Flannery O’Connor, biographies of
Tolstoy, and every single book written by L. M.
Montgomery.
Matthew Arnold wrote, “All knowledge is interesting to a
wise man,” and I often thought that if I took some time to
learn more about the political situation in the Middle East,
the architecture of Louis Sullivan, or the legacy of John
Marshall, I would find these subjects very interesting. And
probably I would. But then I think—well, I’d like to like
Bach’s music more than I do, and I could probably make
myself like it better if I tried, but I don’t like having to try to
make myself like things. I want to spend more time on the
things that I already like.
Along with following my jumble of interests, I searched for
other ways to “Go off the path.” I skimmed newspaper
sections that I usually skipped. I disciplined myself to look
into the windows of stores instead of walking by, oblivious. I
started carrying a camera everywhere, to sharpen my eye.
Each Monday in the month of May, I bought three new
magazines—ones that I would never have read otherwise.
The first Monday, I wandered into a magazine shop near
my gym that I’d walked by a thousand times, and I
discovered a magazine gold mine. Racks lined the room
from floor to ceiling, and more piles fanned out across the
floor. Three times, I walked to an unfamiliar subject area,
shut my eyes, and pulled out a magazine at random. After
making sure that I hadn’t accidentally picked up a porn
magazine, I headed for the cash register. I ended up buying
Equus (a special issue on “the Healthy Horse”), Paper

Crafts Gourmet (“Easy ideas for food, cards & more!”), and
Fresh Outlook (“The premier Christian magazine: spirit,
body, life, home, business”).
That night I looked at each of them from cover to cover.
Never before had I thought about the challenges of taking a
sick horse to a horse hospital or about hoof care. I’d never
given any thought to the strangely fascinating life cycle of
horse parasites. I did remain puzzled, however, by why a
magazine store in midtown Manhattan stocked a magazine
aimed at horse owners. I was intrigued by the text of Paper
Crafts Gourmet’s sample invitation for a “Mocktail
Party”—“Join us for dinner and mocktails with a Caribbean
flair as we celebrate our 13th anniversary.” I understood, of
course, that some people don’t drink alcohol. Is it the case
that people in social sets where most people don’t drink—
observant Mormons, say—a host would serve “mocktails”?
In Fresh Outlook, a Bible quotation grabbed my attention.
All day long, I’d been annoyed by something a friend had
done. I really wanted to criticize that person. I knew that if I
did I’d feel remorseful afterward, but I was itching to pour
out my irritation to some sympathetic ear. Then I came to a
magazine page that had almost no text on it, so the words
stood out in sharp relief: “Where there is no wood, the fire
goes out; and where there is no talebearer, strife ceases.”
Proverbs 26:20. Point taken.
Each Monday, I have to admit, I dreaded reading the
unfamiliar magazines. It felt like work and a waste of time,
not like fun. But every week, I was glad that I’d done it. I

always found something useful, provocative, or amusing. It
was a painless (though slightly pricey) way to get new and
unexpected ideas into my brain.
I intended to read a poem every night, but I never
managed to make myself start that program. I’m sure it
would have been worthwhile, but it seemed like too much
work. Maybe I’ll do that if I ever undertake a Happiness
Project II.
START A COLLECTION.
I’d always wished that I had a collection—I’d never collected
anything other than the knickknacks I’d collected as an
eight-year-old. A collection provides a mission, a reason to
visit new places, the excitement of the chase, a field of
expertise (no matter how trivial), and, often, a bond with
other people. It sounded like so much fun.
There are two kinds of collectors. The first kind seeks to
have a complete set—of stamps, of coins, of Barbie dolls
—and keeps a comprehensive and orderly kind of
collection. The second kind of collector is driven by sheer
desire, by the siren call of objects. My mother, of the
second camp, has a tremendous knowledge and passion
for objects and materials; she spends a lot of time visiting
museums and walking through stores. Her collections of
Japanese ikebana baskets, Tartanware, Royal Bayreuth
porcelain tomatoes, and in particular her magnificent
collection of Santa Clauses, give her great pleasure.

I wanted to start a collection—but what should I collect? I
didn’t have enough passion to justify an expensive
collection, and I didn’t want to collect junk. I decided to
collect bluebirds, because bluebirds are a symbol of
happiness. As far as I know, this connection arose from
Maurice Maeterlinck’s play The Blue Bird. A fairy tells two
children, “The Blue Bird stands for happiness,” and she
orders them to set out to find the Blue Bird for her sick
daughter. After many adventures, the children come home,
unsuccessful—to find the Blue Bird waiting for them. “It’s
the Blue Bird we were looking for! We’ve been miles and
miles and miles, and he was here all the time!” This
unsubtle moral, of course, was quite fitting for my
happiness project.
For no other reason except to keep my resolution to “Go
off the path,” one afternoon I stepped into an oddly
comprehensive hardware store that’s tucked into my
neighborhood. It’s small yet carries everything from
lightbulbs to wooden puzzles to vacuum cleaners to fancy
candles. I found myself staring up at an array of realistically
carved, battery-operated “Breezy Singers” birds, which are
outfitted with motion sensors so they move and twitter when
anyone walks by. I wouldn’t have considered buying one of
the birds, except that I noticed that one of the birds was a
bluebird. I stood transfixed. I could buy it for my collection.
And so I did.
Another day, I went with a friend down to the Flower
District. We wandered around looking at the fake and fresh
flowers and the enticing cheap decorative gewgaws. I’m

fascinated by bags of tiny plastic babies, fake zinnia
heads, and butterflies made of gold sequins, and she’s
exactly the same way.
“Hey,” I asked, “do you think any of these places would
sell anything bluebird-related?” Having a collection
transformed an aimless walk into a quest.
“Are you kidding?” she said. “There’s a store that sells
fake birds on this very corner.” (How she knew this, I have
no idea.) I bought a realistic bluebird for $2.71.
A year ago I wouldn’t have allowed myself to make these
purchases. I wouldn’t have cluttered my office with
bluebirds. I would’ve felt too guilty about taking time away
from work to do “nothing.” But my resolutions, like “Take
time for projects” and “Go off the path,” had changed my
attitude. I saw that there was value in taking time to play,
and along the same lines, I’d come to see the merit of
treasuring a little clutter. I’d been relentlessly purging
everything superfluous from our apartment when a friend
said to me, “Remember to leave a little mess.”
“Really?” I asked, surprised. “Why?”
“Every house needs a few junk drawers where you can
find unexpected things. It’s good to have a bit of chaos
someplace, with some things that don’t really belong
anywhere but that you want to keep. You never know when
stuff like that will come in handy, plus it’s just nice to know
it’s there.”
As soon as she said it, I knew she was right. Someplace
I need an empty shelf, and someplace I need a junk drawer.
Maybe my bluebirds do make for a bit of clutter—but that’s

fine. I want my office to house some playful elements that
don’t have to be useful.
As I wired my bluebird to the standing lamp next to my
desk, I was glad that I’d gone off the path. It was fun. What’s
more, buoyed by this fun, I had the mental wherewithal to sit
down and tackle something that I’d been postponing for a
long time: figuring out how to post my own photographs
onto my blog. So although I felt as though I’d been wasting
time, in fact I’d been quite productive—just not in a typingat-my-computer kind of way.
The work on Eliza’s scrappy cap had given me an idea
for another kind of collection. I started a “Happiness Box” in
which I’d collect all sorts of little trinkets meant to trigger
happy thoughts and memories.
I had the perfect box—a box I loved but that had never
really been suitable for any purpose. My college roommate
had given it to me. It was old, with a lid decorated with two
panels painted with roses and two panels of cloudy mirror.
It bothered me to have it sitting around, unappreciated; now
I had a special plan for it. I put in an ancient, tiny Snoopy
memo pad that reminded me of my sister when she was
little. I added a miniature china teacup from my
grandmother’s teacup collection. I put in a figurine of
Dorothy to remind me of home and Eliza’s early love of ruby
red slippers. (“Those ruby slippers have always had the
power to take you back to Kansas,” she’d croon as she’d
reenact the climactic scene from The Wizard of Oz. “Just
tap your heels together three times, Dorothy, and you’ll be
home in two seconds.”) I put in my last pair of Coke-bottle

glasses, made before they had the technology to make the
lenses thin—they’re hilarious, now that I don’t have to wear
them. A small cloth Little Red Riding Hood doll reminded
me of all the times I’d read the story of “Little Red Hoodie”
to Eleanor. A tiny Lego cone-shaped tree stood for all the
Christmas trees of my childhood. I put in a New York Public
Library bookmark—a reference to my favorite New York
City institution. I put in an old, worn set of dice, to symbolize
chance. I put in an American Girl miniature card featuring a
bluebird.
The Happiness Box was as useful as the toy jars. I had
lots of little objects lying around in odd corners that I’d kept
for sentimental reasons. They were clutter when scattered
around but extremely satisfying as a collection.
I asked blog readers about their collections. Did they find
collecting fun? What did they collect?

My collections give me great joy. On the weekends and
whenever I travel, I have an excuse to poke through little
shops, flea markets, etc. It’s not as much fun if I’m not
looking for something. I collect glass snowglobes, Bakelite
jewelry, light-up globes, and vintage Girl Scout stuff. It
reminds me of my travels and good times with my friends,
and also my apartment looks like “me” and (I think) stylish
without me spending much money.
I love collecting vintage religious art books.

Yes, I have a few collections…vintage cake toppers,
heart hankies, vintage bluebird “things”…and I think a few
more.:) I used to collect hearts, but I started getting heart
EVERYTHING from people as gifts. Then I felt obligated to
display them. That took the fun out of it!
I think it’s important to know that what you find fun can
change. I’ve gotten rid of most of my doll collection because
I don’t enjoy them anymore. My mom says, “Save them for
your daughter!” but I’m sure she’d have more fun making
her own collection than inheriting 30–40 dolls that mean
nothing to her. I’ll just save a few.
As for collections, too much “stuff” displayed around the
house makes me feel suffocated. I love to see how other
people decorate their homes for the holidays, but to me it
always seems like a chore—not fun. We tend to do simple,
meaningful decorations for Christmas, and that’s about it.
On the note of collections, I’m sure they’re fun for others,
but I simply don’t want to store, clean, and maintain more
things. I’d rather spend my time reading, decorating my
house, or trying new recipes.
After having started both of my collections, I had to admit
—I don’t have a true collector’s personality. Maybe one day
I’ll develop an interest in something that’s intense enough to

make a collection interesting—but I haven’t found it yet.
Turns out I can’t just decide, “I’ll start a collection!” and tap
into the collector’s high. Alas, that Secret of Adulthood is
true: just because something is fun for someone else
doesn’t make it fun for me.
By the end of May, I’d figured out that “fun” falls into three
categories: challenging fun, accommodating fun, and
relaxing fun.
Challenging fun is the most rewarding but also the most
demanding. It can create frustration, anxiety, and hard work.
It often requires errands. It takes time and energy. In the
end, however, it pays off with the most satisfying fun.
Usually less challenging, but still requiring a fair bit of
effort, is accommodating fun. A family trip to the
playground is accommodating fun. Yes, it’s fun, but I’m
really there because my children want to go. Was it Jerry
Seinfeld who said, “There’s no such thing as ‘Fun for the
whole family’”? Going to a family holiday dinner, even going
to dinner and a movie with friends, requires
accommodation. It strengthens relationships, it builds
memories, it’s fun—but it takes a lot of effort, organization,
coordination with other people, and, well, accommodation.
Relaxing fun is easy. I don’t have to hone skills or take
action. There’s very little coordination with other people or
preparation involved. Watching TV—the largest consumer
of the world’s time after sleeping and work—is relaxing fun.
Research shows that challenging fun and

accommodating fun, over the long term, bring more
happiness, because they’re sources of the elements that
make people happiest: strong personal bonds, mastery, an
atmosphere of growth. Relaxing fun tends to be passive—
by design. So if relaxing fun is the least fun kind of fun, why
is watching TV so popular? Because although we get more
out of challenging fun and accommodating fun, we must
also put more into it. It takes energy and forethought.
The resolutions for this month were a bit of a struggle. I’d
expected to find it fun to have fun, to go off the path, to start
a collection, and it was fun, but only after I truly forced
myself to do these things. I was a bit dismayed to realize
how attached I was to my routine, how uninterested I was in
trying new things, how much I disliked turning away from my
self-assigned reading and writing. Was I really such a dull
creature of habit?
Then I thought—wait. Novelty is stimulating, and it clearly
was good for me, from time to time, to do something
different. But my efforts had the unexpected benefit of
making me realize how much I loved my habits and the
familiar stops in my day. The pleasure of doing a thing in
the same way, at the same time, every day, and savoring it,
is worth noting. As Andy Warhol observed, “Either once
only, or every day. If you do something once it’s exciting,
and if you do it every day it’s exciting. But if you do it, say,
twice or just almost every day, it’s not good any more.” I
loved walking through the doors of the library that’s just a
block from my house and where I did most of my writing. I

loved my three coffee shops where I worked when I wasn’t
in the library. I loved adding yet another volume to my tower
of happiness-related books. I loved my workday. For me,
that was fun.
As I finished up my month devoted to play, I was struck
again by my good fortune in life; I didn’t face an enormous
obstacle to happiness. One of my main goals for my
happiness project was to prepare myself for adversity, to
develop the self-discipline and the habits to deal with a bad
thing when it happened, but as I posted to my blog, I
worried that people who faced a major happiness trial—
such as a serious illness, job loss, divorce, addiction,
depression—might be put off. Would they think, “Who is
she to talk about happiness when everything in her life is
fine?” I posted a few questions to ask readers their views:

Are you more likely to think about happiness—and to take
action to try to build happiness—when everything in your life
is going well, or when you’re facing a catastrophe?
If you’re facing a catastrophe, does it help to think about
taking little, ordinary steps to build happiness (having lunch
with a friend, making your bed in the morning, going
outside for a quick walk)? Or are modest efforts like that
dwarfed by the magnitude of what you’re facing?
My hope is that the ideas presented in the Happiness
Project (book and blog) can help people trying to be
happier within their ordinary life, and also help people trying
to be happier in the context of a major happiness

challenge. Do you think that following these kinds of
strategies does help to build happiness?
Many readers responded. They seemed to agree that
taking steps to be happy—whether in the context of
ordinary life or catastrophe—was worth the effort.

I think

it’s important to recognize those happy moments
when they are happening. As one who has struggled with
chronic pain, I think it’s a good day if I can get out and have
that lunch with a friend or meet a deadline or notice the
sunshine. Recognizing happy moments keeps me from
being overwhelmed when the pain is too much.
I think you don’t understand what happiness is until you
are forced, through adversity, to look for it. I was divorced
last year. The anger and sadness in both me and my
children has been extreme, one child failed two semesters
of school and finally started counseling for depression.
Another one has been in trouble twice for alcohol-related
problems. We handle things so differently: I work hard to
find positive ways of dealing with my anger and sadness
rather than just numb the pain…It’s all about living in the
moment and appreciating the smallest things. Surrounding
yourself with things that inspire you and letting go of the
obsessions that want to take over your mind. It is a daily
struggle sometimes and hard work but I do understand

happiness begins with my own attitude and how I look at
the world…
I think adversity magnifies behavior. Tend to be a control
freak? You’ll become more controlling. Eat for comfort?
You’ll eat more. And on the positive, if you tend to focus on
solutions and celebrate small successes, that’s what you’ll
do in adversity. But with a correspondingly bigger success
at the end.
I started what has amounted to my own happiness
project about four years ago, by necessity rather than by
choice. When my husband of 30 years died I realized that if
I didn’t make an active, conscious effort to figure out how to
be happy, it wasn’t going to happen. By this age, almost
everyone has given at least some thought to happiness and
how to go about achieving it. But in coming to terms with
life as it is now, I realized that I wasn’t even entirely certain
what the hell happiness *was*.
I think a real life-shaking catastrophe can provide
insights into happiness that you couldn’t have any other
way, but the more you know about what happiness really
means for you before you come to that point, the better
equipped you’ll be to handle it. By all means, work on
understanding happiness NOW.
I have had a difficult time these past few years and
happiness was something I needed like water in a desert. I

deliberately looked for EVERY LITTLE THING that might lift
my mood, anything to get me through. One of the things I
found was blogging. I practice yoga daily & meditate, which
has provided great peace. I tend a vegetable garden, look
after family & pets, cook and search for books I love to
read. I make art and keep a journal. On sunny days, I think
“great,” a good day to be outdoors and on grey days I think
“great,” a good day to be indoors. It’s all in your attitude. I
choose to be happy, in spite of whatever drama that is
going on in my life.
I was married a very long time and in all those years life
revolved around my husband. Long story short, he dumped
me, probably when things got too boring, dunno. I went into
a depression for years. Why?? I had no life of my own, I
didn’t have the first clue as to who I was or what I wanted. It
really never occurred to me in all those years of marriage
that I needed to have a little tiny place for me to have my
own things going on in life. Before the catastrophe, not
after! After was too late. I was waiting to die, but I didn’t die,
God isn’t ready for what little there is of me yet. Now, I see
that it’s like saving money, you can’t save for when you get
laid off, after you get laid off; rather, you have to save while
you have a job and the money is still coming in. Life is like
that, you have to DO while you are able to think of what you
want, what you like, what needs it will fill, how it will enhance
your life, how it will help you to maintain you, so that you
have some reserves when crunch time comes.

For me, when things are going well, and I am happy, I
don’t think about happiness too much. It’s when I start to
become unhappy or depressed that I concentrate on it
more and try to think of ways to improve it.
I have been through 2 serious bouts of depression in the
last 4 years and because I have experienced this in the
past I am very aware of the warning signs and try to catch it
before it gets too bad. I find that keeping busy, especially
seeing other people, is very helpful. It can be tough, as
sometimes the last thing you want to do is see people or do
ANYTHING at all, but if you can force yourself, you will
usually end up having a good time and feeling better for it.
The other strategy that certainly works for me although, it
can be difficult to implement, is to become aware of your
interior monologue and start arguing with it if it gets too
negative. When I feel down, then I’ll start thinking how
useless I am, and pathetic and how nobody can really like
me etc. etc. I find that determinedly interrupting these
thoughts and forcing myself to think the opposite—or doing
something that prevents thinking, like reading a book or
watching a film, can really help avoid the downward spiral. (I
admit mentally arguing with your thoughts can feel silly, but
it does help!)
Remembering that joy exists is tough when you’ve been
traumatized. Joy is a big concept and utterly unbelievable

when we are in the depths of catastrophe. But happiness…
happiness is more accessible. We can be miserable and
then find ourselves laughing, even if just for a few seconds.
It reaffirms the will to live, and from there we can branch out.
Happiness, and the belief we have in it, is the foundation for
survival. As a survivor of life-threatening trauma, it’s been
the small idea of happiness that propelled me toward the
larger idea of joy that eventually freed me from complexPTSD. And now here I am, happy daily and always striving
for that joyful moment. It can be done! And your project—
anyone’s happiness project—can be a starting point for the
long road to recovery.
I think you can “bank” happiness—that is to say, learn
about yourself and what makes you happy while the sailing
is smooth. When the waves swell up and get rough, you
have the memories of the times you were happy. You’ve
been there and done that so you know it’s possible to do it
again. It’s a matter of weathering the storm and navigating
to your happiness destination. It probably won’t be the
same path but it is achievable.
Reading these comments strengthened my conviction
that happiness isn’t something we should consider only
when life is going well and also isn’t something we should
consider only when life is going badly. As Samuel Johnson
said, “The business of the wise man is to be happy.” In
whatever condition life happens to offer.

6
JUNE
Make Time for Friends

FRIENDSHIP

Remember birthdays.
Be generous.
Don’t gossip.
Make three new friends.
Show up.

One

conclusion was blatantly clear from my happiness
research: everyone from contemporary scientists to ancient
philosophers agrees that having strong social bonds is
probably the most meaningful contributor to happiness.
The positive-psychology superstars Ed Diener and
Martin Seligman cite studies demonstrating that “of 24
character strengths, those that best predict life satisfaction
are the interpersonal ones.” Epicurus agreed, albeit in
slightly more poetic phraseology: “Of all the things that
wisdom provides for living one’s entire life in happiness,
the greatest by far is the possession of friendship.”
You need close long-term relationships, you need to be

able to confide in others, you need to belong. Studies show
that if you have five or more friends with whom to discuss
an important matter, you’re far more likely to describe
yourself as “very happy.” Some researchers argue that over
the last twenty years, the number of confidants claimed by
the average American has dropped. Perhaps because
people move more frequently and work longer hours, they
have less time for building friendships. (On the good side,
family ties are strengthening.) In fact, if a midlife crisis hits,
one of the most common complaints is the lack of true
friends.
At the same time, no matter what they’re doing, people
tend to feel happier when they’re with other people. One
study showed that whether you are exercising, commuting,
or doing housework, everything is more fun in company.
This is true not just of extroverts but, perhaps surprisingly, of
introverts as well. In fact, researchers reported that out of
fifteen daily activities, they found only one during which
people were happier alone rather than with other people—
and that was praying. To my mind, that isn’t an exception at
all. The point of praying is that you’re not talking to yourself.
Not only does having strong relationships make it far
more likely that you take joy in life, but studies show that it
also lengthens life (incredibly, even more than stopping
smoking), boosts immunity, and cuts the risk of depression.
To keep loneliness at bay, you need at least one close
relationship with someone in whom you can confide (not
just a pal with whom you talk about impersonal subjects,
like sports, pop culture, or politics); you also need a

relationship network, which helps provide a sense of
identity and self-esteem and in which you can give and
receive support.
For June, I focused on my relationships by strengthening
old friendships, deepening existing friendships, and
making new friends.
REMEMBER BIRTHDAYS.
All the happiness experts emphasized the importance of
strengthening bonds with friends—but how exactly are you
supposed to do that?
At a bare minimum, you can remember birthdays. I’ve
never been good at remembering friends’ birthdays—or, to
be more accurate, I never remembered any friend’s
birthday (except one friend whose birthday falls the day
after mine). Sending out birthday e-mails would ensure that
I was in touch with my friends at least once a year. That
sounded meager, but the fact is, it would be a vast
improvement in many cases.
Many of my friends were on Facebook, which tracks
birthdays, but many weren’t, so I had to send out a bunch of
e-mails to ask for birthdays. While I was at it, I decided to
update my entire address book and copy the information
onto my computer. For years, I’d been adding and crossing
out entries in the pages of my Filofax, which were now
practically illegible and dangerously irreplaceable.
Once I started getting replies, I found an Internet site,

HappyBirthday.com, that sends out date reminders, and I
started the long, tedious process of plugging birth dates
into the Web site and typing address information into a
Word document. Tackling this nagging task was dull work,
but, as happiness theory would predict, completing it gave
me a big boost of energy and satisfaction. Having the
computerized address list didn’t make me feel closer to
anyone, but I think it will in the future, because it will be so
much easier to stay close to people now that I have a
legible, complete set of contact information.
When I told a friend about my resolution to send birthday
e-mails, he said, “But you should call! A call is so much
better.” Along the same lines, when I started sending out
“Happy birthday!” messages, I felt that I needed to send a
long message if I hadn’t been in contact with a friend for a
long time. Then I remembered a Secret of Adulthood
(courtesy of Voltaire): “Don’t let the perfect be the enemy of
the good.” Fact is, I disliked talking on the phone and knew
that I wouldn’t call. Maybe I should, but I wouldn’t. But I’d
send an e-mail. And I decided that it was all right to send a
very short e-mail. The important thing was to maintain the
connection—and if I made the task too onerous, I might not
stick with it.
I used HappyBirthday.com only for birthdays, but a friend
told me that he also added significant dates from his
children’s lives. “That way I can be reminded of the first
date the kids talked, waved bye-bye, or whatever. It’s
something nice to think about when I’m away at work.” That
struck me as a very happy idea.

Looking at my completed contacts list made me reflect
sadly on some friendships that had faded. My address
book held names of people who had once been close
friends—but were no longer. In particular, I thought of a
friend from high school. She’d been one grade ahead of
me, and we were an archetypal case of the glamorous, hellraising older girl and her studious, law-abiding, worshipful
sidekick.
Without quite knowing how we’d fallen out of touch, I
hadn’t talked to her in more than a decade. I had her name
on my list but no current information. I tried to get her phone
number or e-mail address through our high school alumni
office, but it didn’t have anything. Of course not, that was so
typical of her. She has a very common name, so I wasn’t
able to find her through an Internet search. After I’d finished
my address list, though, I ran into a mutual friend from
Kansas City who said that she might be living in New
Orleans. That was all I needed finally to track her down. It
was funny; after all these years, I still remembered that she
was vain about her unusual middle name, and I found her by
including the middle initial in my search terms. In these little
ways, our childhood selves stay with us.
I called her at work. She sounded astounded to hear from
me—but happy.
That night we talked for two hours. Hearing her voice
brought back a lot of memories I’d forgotten; it reenergized
some part of my brain that had been dormant.
Before we hung up, I remembered to ask, “What’s your
birthday?” This time, ten years won’t go by without contact.

There wasn’t really a way for us to become close friends
again; we live too far apart, and too much time has passed.
But for years, I’d been bothered by a sense of this dangling
relationship; it gave me enormous pleasure to talk to her
again. I made a note to pester her to come to Kansas City
for the holidays.
BE GENEROUS.
Generous acts strengthen the bonds of friendship, and
what’s more, studies show that your happiness is often
boosted more by providing support to other people than
from receiving support yourself. I certainly get more
satisfaction out of thinking about good deeds I’ve done for
other people than I do from thinking about good deeds that
others have done for me. It’s a Secret of Adulthood: Do
good, feel good.
For example, I felt great whenever I remembered how I’d
helped a high school student. The organization Student
Sponsor Partners had paired us as “sponsor” and “student”
back when she was in ninth grade, and as a senior, she’d
had trouble with her college applications. She’d been
paralyzed by anxiety, and at first I’d had no idea how to help
—but I asked around and managed to find a
recommendation for a place to go, and one day we walked
into the New Settlement Apartments College Center. We
each breathed a sigh of relief when we saw the college
posters, the bookshelves crammed with catalogues and

test prep guides, and the sign asking “Need help writing
your personal essay?” We’d found the right place. She got
her applications in on time.
To do a better job of “Being generous,” I had to reflect on
the nature of generosity. Giving presents is one way to be
generous, but taking a box of chocolates to a dinner party
wasn’t the answer for me. I don’t begrudge spending
money on friends, but I dislike shopping. I didn’t want to
create more errands for myself. So, okay. I don’t like to
shop or do errands, but what could I do, within the confines
of my own nature, to be generous? I needed to cultivate
generosity of spirit.
So I looked for other strategies. I hit on a few: “Help
people think big,” “Bring people together,” “Contribute in my
way,” and “Cut people slack.”
Help People Think Big.
One of the most generous acts, I’ve realized, is to help
someone think big. Words of enthusiasm and confidence
from a friend can inspire you to tackle an ambitious goal:
“You should do that!” “You should start your own business!”
“You should run for office!” “You should apply for that grant!”
I’d had a wonderful experience helping people think big
myself. After Eliza started kindergarten, her nursery school
arranged a reunion for all the children who had “graduated.”
While the children played with their former classmates, the
nursery school directors, Nancy and Ellen, led a parent
discussion about the kindergarten transition. As always,

their insights were extremely helpful. When I stood up to
leave, I thought, “These two should write a book.” I was
immediately convinced that this was the greatest idea ever.
I suggested it to them on the spot.
“You know, we’ve thought about that,” Ellen said, “but
never very seriously.”
That night I was so excited by the idea of their book
project that I couldn’t fall asleep. I didn’t know these two
women well, so I wasn’t sure whether to press the issue. On
the other hand, I felt positive that they could write a terrific
book. I suspected that nothing more would happen unless I
nudged them along, so I asked if they wanted to meet for
coffee to discuss it. We met, and as we talked, they
became increasingly enthusiastic. I put them in touch with
my agent. They put some ideas down on paper. In a flash,
they had a book contract, they wrote the book, and now
Nancy Schulman and Ellen Birnbaum’s Practical Wisdom
for Parents: Demystifying the Preschool Years is on the
shelves. Knowing that I played a small role in their
achievement made me intensely happy.
As I was trying to stay alert for ways to “Help people think
big,” I had an enormous happiness breakthrough: my
Second Splendid Truth. I’m not sure why it took me so long
to see this plainly, because I’d understood the principles
involved for a long time, but there was a circularity to these
ideas that confused me. At last, one June morning, it came
clear:
One of the best ways to make yourself happy is to make

other people happy.
One of the best ways to make other people happy is to
be happy yourself.
This was a major, major insight. Obvious, but major. The
Second Splendid Truth clarified many things that had been
mixed up in my mind.
For example, what is the relationship between altruism
and happiness? Some people argue that because doing
good deeds brings happiness, no act can be truly altruistic,
because when we act for the benefit of others, we please
ourselves.
The Second Splendid Truth (Part A) provides the
answer: yes, of course, so what? All the better! That feeling
of happiness doesn’t minimize the “goodness” of the act.
The fact is, the sight of someone performing a generous or
kind act always makes me feel happy. Especially if it’s me!
The spectacle of virtue inspires the feeling of elevation—
one of the most delicate pleasures that the world offers. As
Simone Weil observed, “Imaginary evil is romantic and
varied; real evil is gloomy, monotonous, barren, boring.
Imaginary good is boring; real good is always new,
marvelous, intoxicating.” That’s true no matter who is
performing that real good.
Also, the Second Splendid Truth underscores the fact
that striving to be happy isn’t a selfish act. After all, one of
the main reasons that I set out to become happier in the
first place was that I figured I’d have an easier time
behaving myself properly if I felt less anxious, irritated,

resentful, and angry; when I reflected on the people I knew,
the happier people were more kind, more generous, and
more fun. By being happy myself, I’d help make other
people happy. And vice versa. “Do good, feel good; feel
good, do good.”
Or to put it another way, suitable for a Snoopy poster:
“There is an ‘I’ in ‘happiness.’”
Bring People Together.
My children’s literature reading group and my writers’
strategy group showed me that another way to be generous
was to “Bring people together.” Studies show that
extroverts and introverts alike get a charge out of
connecting with others; also, because people are sources
of information and resources for one another, if you help
bring people together, you provide them with new sources
of support.
I looked for ways to connect people. I helped organize a
reunion of the Supreme Court clerks who clerked the same
year that I did. (The justices organize reunions of their own
clerks, but apparently, our group was the only one that held
a reunion of all the clerks from a particular term.) I worked
to start a group to support the children’s rooms of the New
York Public Library. I set up a friend on a blind date, which
resulted in immediate, total love. I helped organize a
barbecue taste-off: a bunch of people from barbecue-proud
states brought their favorite homestate barbecue so we
could debate the fine points of beef versus pork, tomato-

based versus vinegar-based sauce, and whether popcorn,
wilted greens, or baked beans were the most appropriate
side dish. I introduced some friends who were moving to
upstate New York to someone I knew up there, and they
ended up being housemates. In each of these cases,
bringing people together took some work from me: looking
up e-mail addresses, coordinating schedules, and so on.
But my resolutions kept ringing in my ears, so I stuck with it,
and each time it was worth the effort.
I wanted some more ideas about how to “Bring people
together,” so I posted a question on my blog. Other people
got the same charge from it that I did.

W hen team building for the churches I have worked with,
we have a rule: FOOD, FOOD, FOOD, FOOD. I have found
having really great finger foods are an excellent way to
connect people. Particularly unusual foods that people have
never tried. It allows you to spark up conversation between
people about their interests.
The way I bring people together is by connecting them
via whatever may be of interest to them. I know I am gifted
at connecting the dots, and I use that skill in the
relationships I build with others. I also have a tendency to
collect and store what may seem like mundane information
about people in my head. Inevitably, I will run into somebody
who needs something, and because of the information I’ve
collected I will have just the right person to introduce to

them to help them achieve whatever they need. Ironically, I
am not a social butterfly at all, but I always seem to be able
to connect people at the right time.
I’ve found that whenever there’s a get-together of friends,
a simple “bring another friend!” prompt helps to make sure
there are new people around. It’s great for meeting new
people or catching up with people you haven’t met in ages
that somebody happened to bump into and invite to the
next get-together.
I get energy from meeting and aligning to new people but
it wears my wife out. However, she is excellent at building
and sustaining deep long-term relationships by “due
dilligence,” keeping on making appointments and
maintaining correspondence. You have to find the aspect of
connecting to others that works for you.
I use dinner parties as a way to connect people and to
strengthen my relationship to all of them. The dinner parties
are small—usually only 4–8 people—which allows for more
in-depth conversation, and we put a lot of thought into
matching all of the guests’ interests to bring about a natural
source of conversation [e.g., our last dinner party included
couples who are animal lovers, another dinner party
grouped world travelers, other occasions grouped knitters,
Harry Potter fans, film buffs, tea lovers, etc.].
Contribute in My Way.

As I looked for other ways to “Be generous,” it occurred to
me that I should try to apply my First Commandment: “Be
Gretchen.” No, I didn’t like to shop for gifts, but how could I
be more generous?
Well, I reflected, I had the passion for clutter clearing that
I’d developed back in January. Many of my friends felt
oppressed by clutter, and I could help. I’d love to help. I
started pressing my ser vices on everyone I talked to.
“Come on, let me come over!” I kept saying. “I need the
buzz of clearing a closet! Believe me, you’ll be happy you
did it! You’ll see, it’s addictive!” My friends were intrigued
but embarrassed. They didn’t want me to see their messes.
Once I managed to talk my way in, however, it was a hugely
satisfying experience for both of us.
One night, for example, a friend and I worked on a single
closet in her house for three hours. She hated her
overstuffed closet so much that she never opened its door;
rather than try to use it, she kept wearing the same clothes
over and over again, and those she kept stacked on her
bureau or draped over the side of the bathtub.
“What should I do before you come over?” she asked, the
day before our meeting. “Should I buy any containers or
special hangers or anything?”
“Do not buy one single organizing gadget,” I said. “All you
need is a few boxes of big garbage bags. Oh, one more
thing—you need to figure out who’s going to get all the stuff
that you’re going to give away.”
“Can I decide that later?”

“No, it’s better to know ahead of time. It’s much easier to
let go of things when you can imagine who’ll benefit from
receiving them.”
“Okay, I can do that. Is that really all?”
“Well,” I said, “maybe get some Diet Coke.”
The next day, I showed up.
“I have no idea where to start,” she said after the usual
apologies for the disorder.
“Don’t worry!” I said. “We’ll go through it several times,
and each time, we’ll eliminate a new layer of clutter, until
nothing’s left except things you want to keep.”
“Okay,” she said dubiously.
“Let’s just jump in.” I knew from experience that I should
start slow. “First, let’s take out all the extra hangers.”
As always, this initial step yielded a pile of unneeded
hangers and cleared out a bunch of space. This was my
flashy morale booster.
“Okay. Now we go through and look at each item. We’re
most suspicious of anything that still has tags or anything
that was a gift or anything that doesn’t fit you now or
anything you associate with pregnancy.”
We eliminated a layer. The giveaway pile was already
large.
“Now we look for duplicates. If you have four pairs of
black pants, are you really ever going to wear your least
favorite pair? Nope.” Good-bye to some khakis, some
shirts, some turtleneck sweaters.
My friend clutched a T-shirt protectively. “I know you’re
going to tell me to get rid of this, but I can’t. I never wear it,

but it was my favorite shirt in college.”
“No, keep it! Absolutely keep some clothes for
sentimental value—just store them somewhere else. They
don’t need to be in your main clothes closet.”
We started a box for keepsake clothes and slid it onto a
high, unused shelf.
“Wow, it’s looking great,” she said as she surveyed our
handiwork.
“We’re not done yet,” I cautioned. “Now we look for ways
to make space. This closet is prime real estate. Let’s put
the heating pad and the duffel bag someplace else.” She
tucked those things into a hall closet. “Do you ever use
these empty shoe boxes?”
“Nope! I have no idea why I kept those.” She chucked
them into the recycling pile. “What now?”
“Now you’re warmed up. We’ll go through the whole
closet again, and you’ll see, there’s more you’ll want to take
out.”
Slowly the back of the closet became visible. By the time
she was done, her closet looked like something from a
magazine. She had even achieved the ultimate luxury: an
empty shelf. We both felt thrilled and triumphant. A few
weeks later, I heard that when she’d had some friends over
for dinner, she’d taken them all to view her closet.
I wasn’t exaggerating when I said that I got a huge buzz
from clearing her clutter. This kind of generosity was far
easier for me to offer than giving a birthday present—and
far more valuable to the recipient.
I looked for other opportunities to give. Last month, as

part of my resolution to “Go off the path,” I’d started carrying
my camera everywhere, so I’d been taking more pictures. A
friend was very pleased to get a photograph I had taken of
her a few weeks before she gave birth; it was the only
photo she had of herself pregnant with her second child.
This was a tiny effort on my part, but it was significant to
her.
Cut People Slack.
During this month of friendship, I happened to read two
memoirs that reminded me of something that’s easy to
forget: people’s lives are far more complicated than they
appear from the outside. That’s why, as part of my
resolution to “Be generous,” I meant to cut people slack.
The “fundamental attribution error” is a psychological
phenomenon in which we tend to view other people’s
actions as reflections of their characters and to overlook
the power of situation to influence their actions, whereas
with ourselves, we recognize the pressures of
circumstance. When other people’s cell phones ring during
a movie, it’s because they’re inconsiderate boors; if my cell
phone rings during a movie, it’s because I need to be able
to take a call from the babysitter.
I tried to remember not to judge people harshly,
especially on the first or second encounter. Their actions
might not reveal their enduring character but instead reflect
some situation they find themselves in. Forbearance is a
form of generosity.

I reminded myself of this resolution when, as I stood
calmly on a street corner with my arm outstretched for a
taxi, a man came tearing up the street, flung out his arm,
and jumped into the cab that, according to all New York City
cab tradition, should have been mine. I started to get
indignant about his unforgivable rudeness; then I thought of
all the reasons that a person might be desperate to steal
the first taxi he saw. Was he rushing to the hospital? Had
he forgotten to pick up his child at school? I wasn’t in any
rush. I should cut the guy some slack.
In a letter to a friend, Flannery O’Connor put this precept
another way: “From 15 to 18 is an age at which one is very
sensitive to the sins of others, as I know from recollections
of myself. At that age you don’t look for what is hidden. It is
a sign of maturity not to be scandalized and to try to find
explanations in charity.” “Find explanations in charity” is a
more holy way of saying “cut people slack.”
SHOW UP.
Just as Woody Allen said that “eighty percent of success is
showing up,” a big part of friendship is showing up. Unless
you make consistent efforts, your friendships aren’t going to
survive.
I came to this realization during a conversation with a
friend. I mentioned to her that I’d been procrastinating about
making arrangements to visit some friends’ new babies. I
loved seeing the babies, but I often delayed because I felt

that I should spend that time working.
“You should do it,” she said. “That kind of thing really
matters.”
“You think so?” I asked. I’d been trying to convince myself
that it didn’t.
“Sure. Not that I hold it against anyone, but I remember
who visited me after I had my baby. Don’t you?”
Well, yes. These are the gestures that deepen casual
friends into close friends, and confirm closeness between
good friends. I immediately made dates to see the not-sonewborns. Around the same time, I made sure to stop by
the opening day of a close friend’s new clothing store. I
came in about an hour after she opened, and I was the very
first person to make a purchase. In each of these cases, I
was very happy that I’d taken the trouble. It was fun, it made
me feel closer to my friends, and it felt like the right thing to
do (the First Splendid Truth in operation).
It was important not only to see close friends but also to
see people I didn’t know very well—say, by going to my
husband’s office party or showing up at parents’ events at
my daughter’s school. Familiarity, it turns out, breeds
affection. The “mere exposure effect” is the term for the fact
that repeated exposure makes you like music, faces—even
nonsense syllables—better. The more often you see a
person, the more intelligent and attractive you’ll find that
person. I’d noticed this about myself. Even when I don’t take
an immediate liking to someone, I tend to like him or her
better the more often we see each other. And at the same
time, the more I show up, the more that person likes me. Of

course, this doesn’t always work. There are some people
you just don’t like, and seeing more of them would probably
just lead to more aggravation. But in cases when you
neither like nor dislike a person, mere exposure can work
to warm your feelings.
DON’T GOSSIP.
Not infrequently, long-term happiness requires you to give
up something that brings happiness in the short term. A
good example? Gossip. When people gossip, they
generally criticize other people, mostly for violating social
and moral codes. Despite its bad reputation, gossip plays
an important social role by reinforcing community values: it
makes people feel closer to each other, it unifies people
who play by the rules, it helps people get a sense of the
values of their community, and it exposes the misbehavior
of those who cheat on their spouses, don’t return phone
calls, or take credit for others’ work. Interesting tidbit: both
men and women prefer to gossip to women, because
women are more satisfying listeners.
But although gossip may serve an important social
function and it’s certainly fun, it’s not a very nice thing to do
—and I always felt bad after a gossipy conversation, even
though I enjoyed it at the time. I wanted to stop telling unkind
stories, making unkind observations (even if factually
accurate), or being too inquisitive about sensitive subjects.
Even expressions of concern can be tricked-up forms of

gossip: “I’m really worried about her, she seems down, do
you think she’s having trouble at work?” That’s gossip.
Even harder, I wanted to stop listening to gossip.
I was at a meeting when someone mentioned of mutual
acquaintances, “I heard that their marriage was in trouble.”
“I hadn’t heard that,” someone replied. So fill us in! was
the implication of her tone.
“Oh, I don’t think that’s true,” I said dismissively. Let’s not
talk about that was the implication of my tone. I’m
embarrassed to admit how hard it was for me to resist this
conversation. I love a rousing analysis of the dynamics of
other people’s marriages.
It wasn’t until I tried to stop gossiping that I realized how
much I did, in fact, gossip. I don’t consider myself meanspirited, and it was sobering to realize how often I said
something I shouldn’t. Jamie and I went to a dinner party,
and I sat next to someone whom I found insufferable. (The
mere exposure effect definitely would not have worked its
magic in this relationship.) I did a fairly good job of being
friendly during dinner, but when we got home and Jamie
said, “Jim’s a nice guy, isn’t he?” I answered, “You didn’t
spend any time with him. I think he’s insufferable, and I
could barely stand talking to him.” I immediately felt terrible
for saying something mean about someone who seemed
like a nice enough guy (even though insufferable). Also, if
Jamie liked someone, I shouldn’t poison his mind with
criticisms. I tried to convince myself that there was a
spousal privilege for gossip that would permit me to gossip

freely with Jamie, but I concluded that though it’s better to
gossip only to Jamie, it’s still best to avoid gossiping
altogether.
I learned another reason not to say critical things about
other people: “spontaneous trait transference.” Studies
show that because of this psychological phenomenon,
people unintentionally transfer to me the traits I ascribe to
other people. So if I tell Jean that Pat is arrogant,
unconsciously Jean associates that quality with me. On the
other hand, if I say that Pat is brilliant or hilarious, I’m linked
to those qualities. What I say about other people sticks to
me—even when I talk to someone who already knows me.
So I do well to say only good things.
MAKE THREE NEW FRIENDS.
It’s easy to say to yourself, “I don’t have time to meet new
people or make new friends,” but usually that’s not true, and
if you can find the time, making a new friend is
tremendously energizing, not enervating. New friends
expand your world by providing an entrance to new
interests, opportunities, and activities and can be an
invaluable source of support and information—and, just as
happiness-inducing, you can play the same role for them.
One strategy I adopted for making more friends sounds a
bit cold-blooded and calculating, but it really worked. I set
myself a target goal. When I entered a situation where I was
meeting new people, I set myself the goal of making three

new friends—among the parents of Eliza’s class, say.
Starting a new job, taking a class, or moving to a new
neighborhood, for example, are obvious opportunities to
make new friends. Having a numerical goal seemed
artificial at first, but it changed my attitude from “Do I like
you? Do I have time to get to know you?” to “Are you
someone who will be one of my three friends?” Somehow
this shift made me behave differently: it made me more
open to people; it prompted me to make the effort to say
more than a perfunctory hello. Of course, “being friends”
means different things in different stages of life. In college, I
spent hours each day with my friends; these days I don’t
spend nearly that much time with Jamie. I have several
friends whose spouses I’ve never met. That’s okay.
As I was trying to meet my friend quota, I often had to
push myself to act friendlier than I felt. Once again, though, I
saw the value of my Third Commandment: “Act the way I
want to feel.” By acting more friendly, I made myself feel
more friendly. Also, research shows that acting in an
outgoing, talkative, adventurous, or assertive way makes
people—even introverts—feel happier. That surprised me,
because I thought introverts were happier in solitude and
quiet. In fact, when introverts push themselves to act more
outgoing, they usually enjoy it and find it cheering.
Connecting with other people lifts people’s moods.
Trying to make friends focused my attention on the
challenge of making a good first impression—that is, how
to act so that others would be interested in befriending me.
First impressions are important, because when people

evaluate others, they weigh initial information much more
heavily than later information. Within ten minutes of meeting
a new person, in fact, people decide what kind of
relationship they want. I made a checklist for myself for my
first encounters.

Smile more frequently.
Studies show that you tend to like people who you think like
you; and that the amount of time you smile during a
conversation has a direct effect on how friendly you’re
perceived to be. (In fact, people who can’t smile due to
facial paralysis have trouble with relationships.)

Actively invite others to join a conversation.
This is polite and appreciated by everyone. A person
outside the conversation is relieved to be inside, and a
person already in the conversation feels good that the kind
gesture has been made.

Create a positive mood.
Don’t focus attention on something negative, such as the
long line at a bar or a bad experience on the subway. As
Samuel Johnson said, “To hear complaints is wearisome
alike to the wretched and the happy.” Another reason why
this is important: Jamie and I were standing in the hall
outside the main room of a large function. A guy we knew
slightly came up to us and said, “Why don’t you go on in?”
I answered, “The room is freezing, and the music is too
loud.” Guess what? He was one of the chief organizers for

the night.

Open a conversation.
Talk about the immediate circumstances: the reason for the
event, the decor of the room, or even that old chestnut, the
weather. A friend checks Google News right before he
goes into any social situation to find a piece of news to use
as a conversational hook: “Did you see that…?”

Try to look accessible and warm.
Nod and say “Uh-huh,” lean forward to show interest, try to
catch every word, have good eye contact, use an energetic
and enthusiastic tone, try to match the speed of the other
person’s speech. You want to try not to glance around the
room, sit with your legs extended, or turn your body away
from your interlocutor—these postures show a lack of
engagement.

Show a vulnerable side and laugh at yourself.
Show a readiness to be pleased.
Most people would prefer to make people laugh than to
laugh themselves; to educate rather than to be educated.
It’s important to allow yourself to be amused and to be
interested. After all, one of the most delightful of pleasures
is to please another person.

Follow others’ conversational leads.
I often feel a perverse desire to thwart a person who is

trying to drive a conversation in a particular way. I
remember chatting with a guy who clearly wanted to talk
about the fact that he had once lived in Vietnam, because
he mentioned it a couple of times, casually and extremely
tangentially. I should cooperate when I can tell that
someone wants to talk about a certain issue.

Ask questions.
It’s a way to show interest and engagement, and most
people love to talk about themselves.
My research drew my attention to a phenomenon that I’d
noticed in my own experience: when making friends, you’ll
find it easier to befriend someone who is already the friend
of a friend. “Triadic closure” helps explain why I enjoy my
kidlit book group and my writers’ groups so much.
Friendship thrives on interconnection, and it’s both
energizing and comforting to feel that you’re building not
just friendships but a social network.
The end of June marked the halfway point in my happiness
project year, and I took some time to ponder my progress
beyond my usual end-of-month assessment. I’m a big
believer in using milestone moments as cues for evaluation
and reflection. As I’d seen in my own life, and as many blog
readers noted in various comments, a milestone such as a
major birthday, marriage, the death of a parent, the birth of
a child, the loss of a job, an important reunion, or the
accomplishment of a career marker such as getting tenure

or making partner (or not) often acts as a catalyst for
positive change.
Evaluating myself at the six-month milestone for my
happiness project, I confirmed that yes, I was feeling
happier. When I asked myself what resolutions had
contributed most to my happiness, I realized again that, far
more than any particular resolution, my Resolutions Chart
was the key element of my happiness project. Constantly
reviewing my resolutions kept them fresh in my mind, so
that as I went through my days, the words of my resolutions
flickered constantly in my mind. I’d see my messy desk and
think, “Tackle a nagging task.” I’d be tempted to leave my
camera at home and I’d think, “Be a treasure house of
happy memories.”
Keeping a Resolutions Chart was an idea that lots of
people found appealing, as I discovered after I added this
note at the bottom of my daily blog posts:
Interested in starting your own Happiness Project? If you’d
like to take a look at my personal Resolutions Chart, for
inspiration, just email me.
Over the next several months, hundreds of readers
requested a copy.

I’m a college freshman and I think your charts will help me
be happier and maybe also stay more on top of my work.

In addition to wanting to try something like this myself, my
husband and I are going to create a month of resolutions
together about Focusing on Our Marriage.
Please would you send me your resolutions list. I am a
probation officer in London and I need to nail it to my wall,
paste it gently on the ceiling in my head, and be mindful of
there being ANOTHER WAY!
When asking for a copy of my charts, many people noted
that they were starting their own happiness projects, and
several sent me their own versions of my Twelve
Commandments. These lists of personal commandments
fascinated me, because they gave such a rich sense of the
diversity of people’s experiences:
Forget the past.
Do stuff.
Talk to strangers.
Stay in touch.
Stop the venting and complaining.
Go outside.
Spread joy.
Never bother with people you hate.
Don’t expect it to last forever.
Everything ends and that’s okay.
Stop buying useless crap.
Make mistakes.

Give thanks: for the ordinary and the extraordinary.
Create something that wasn’t there before.
Notice the color purple.
Make footprints: “I was here.”
Be silly. Be light.
Be the kind of woman I want my daughters to be.
Shit happens—count on it.
Friends are more important than sex.
Choose not to take things personally.
Be loving and love will find you.
Soak it in.
This too shall pass.
“Be still, and know that I am God.”
Remember, everyone’s doing their best all the time.
Get a hold of yourself, Meredith!
Imagine the eulogy: how do I want to be remembered?
Expect a miracle.
I am already enough.
Let it go, man.
Light a candle or STFU.
Recognize my ghosts.
What do I really, really, really want?
Help is everywhere.
What would I do if I weren’t scared?
If you can’t get out of it, get into it.
Keep it simple.
Give without limits, give without expectations.
React to the situation.
Feel the danger (many dangers—saturated fat, drunk

driving, not making deadlines, law school—don’t feel
dangerous).
Start where you are.
People give what they have to give.
Be specific about my needs.
Let go, let God.
If you’re not now here, you’re nowhere.
Play the hand I’m dealt.
Own less, love more.
One is too many; a hundred aren’t enough.
Nothing too much.
Only connect.
Be a haven.
It was amusing to see that some people’s
commandments directly contradicted other people’s
commandments, but I could envision how different people
would benefit from opposing advice:
Just say yes.
Just say no.
Do it now.
Wait.
One thing at a time.
Do everything all at once.
Always strive to do your best.
Remember the 80/20 rule.
As for me, six months into the project, I could say that

although, as I’d realized in April, my basic temperament
hadn’t changed, each day I felt more joy and less guilt; I had
more fun, less anxiety. My life was pleasanter with cleaner
closets and a cleaner conscience.
One thing that had surprised me as my project
progressed was the importance of my physical state. It
really mattered whether I got enough sleep, got regular
exercise, didn’t let myself get too hungry, and kept myself
warm. I’d learned to be more attentive to keeping myself
feeling energetic and comfortable. On the other hand, one
thing that didn’t surprise me was that the most direct boosts
to my happiness came from the steps I devoted to social
bonds. Jamie, Eliza, and Eleanor, my family, my friends—it
was my efforts to strengthen those relationships that
yielded the most gratifying results. What’s more, I noticed
that my happiness made it easier for me to be patient,
cheerful, kind, generous, and all the other qualities I was
trying to cultivate. I found it easier to keep my resolutions,
laugh off my annoyances, have enough energy for fun.
But the areas that had been toughest for me when I
started were still the toughest. When I looked back on my
Resolutions Charts, I could see definite patterns. The
checks and X marks revealed that I was continuing to
struggle to keep my temper, to go off the path, and to be
generous, among many other things. In some ways, in fact,
I’d made myself less happy; I’d made myself far more
aware of my faults, and I felt more disappointed with myself
when I slipped up. My shortcomings stared up at me
reproachfully from the page. One of my Secrets of

Adulthood is “Happiness doesn’t always make you feel
happy,” and a heightened awareness of my failings, though
salutary, wasn’t bringing me happiness in the short term—
but in the long term, I was sure, I’d be happier as a
consequence of behaving better. I was comforted by the
words of my model Benjamin Franklin, who reflected of his
own chart: “On the whole, though I never arrived at the
perfection I had been so ambitious of obtaining, but fell far
short of it, yet as I was, by the endeavor, a better and a
happier man than I otherwise should have been had I not
attempted it.”
Ironically, too, I suspected that I had lost some of my
playtime to the happiness project. My resolutions were
making me happier and I was having more fun, true, but it
did feel as though I had less pure leisure time. Observing
the evening tidy-up, remembering friends’ birthdays,
showing up, making time for projects, and all the rest meant
that I had less time to reread David Copperfield in bed.
Though of course I could make a resolution to cover that
activity, too.

7
JULY
Buy Some Happiness

MONEY

Indulge in a modest splurge.
Buy needful things.
Spend out.
Give something up.

The relationship between money and happiness was one
of the most interesting, most complicated, and most
sensitive questions in my study of happiness. People,
including the experts, seemed very confused.
As I did my research, Gertrude Stein’s observation
frequently floated through my mind: “Everyone has to make
up their mind if money is money or money isn’t money and
sooner or later they always do decide that money is
money.” Money satisfies basic material needs. It’s a means
and an end. It’s a way to keep score, win security, exercise
generosity, and earn recognition. It can foster mastery or
dilettantism. It symbolizes status and success. It buys time
—which can be spent on aimless drifting or purposeful

action. It creates power in relationships and in the world. It
often stands for the things that we feel are lacking: if only
we had the money, we’d be adventurous or thin or cultured
or respected or generous.
Before I could figure out my resolutions for the month, I
had to clarify my thinking about money. I was skeptical of
much of what I read. In particular, I kept seeing the
argument “Money can’t buy happiness,” but it certainly
seemed that people appear fairly well convinced about the
significance of money to their happiness. Money is not
without its benefits, and the opposite case, though
frequently made, has never proved widely persuasive. And
in fact, studies show that people in wealthier countries do
report being happier than people in poorer countries, and
within a particular country, people with more money do tend
to be happier than those with less. Also, as countries
become richer, their citizens become less focused on
physical and economic security and more concerned with
goals such as happiness and self-realization. Prosperity
allows us to turn our attention to more transcendent matters
—to yearn for lives not just of material comfort but of
meaning, balance, and joy.
Within the United States, according to a 2006 Pew
Research Center study, 49 percent of people with an
annual family income of more than $100,000 said they
were “very happy,” in contrast to 24 percent of those with an
annual family income of less than $30,000. And the
percentages of reported happiness increased as income
rose: 24 percent for those earning under $30,000; 33

percent for $30,000 to under $75,000; 38 percent for
$75,000 to under $100,000; and 49 percent for more than
$100,000. (Now, it’s also true that there may be some
reverse correlation: happy people become rich faster
because they’re more appealing to other people and their
happiness helps them succeed.)
Also, it turns out that while the absolute level of wealth
matters, relative ranking matters as well. One important
way that people evaluate their circumstances is to compare
themselves with the people around them and with their own
previous experiences. For instance, people measure
themselves against their age peers, and making more
money than others in their age group tends to make people
happier. Along the same lines, research shows that people
who live in a neighborhood with richer people tend to be
less happy than those in a neighborhood where their
neighbors make about as much money as they do. A study
of workers in various industries showed that their job
satisfaction was less tied to their salaries than to how their
salaries compared to their coworkers’ salaries. People
understand the significance of this principle: in one study, a
majority of people chose to earn $50,000 where others
earned $25,000, rather than earn $100,000 where others
earned $250,000. My mother grew up feeling quite well-todo in my parents’ little hometown of North Platte, Nebraska,
because her father had a highly coveted union job as an
engineer on the Union Pacific Railroad. By contrast, a
friend told me that he had felt poor growing up in New York

City because he lived on Fifth Avenue above 96th Street—
the less fashionable section of a very fashionable street.
The proponents of the “Money can’t buy happiness”
argument point to studies showing that people in the United
States don’t rate their quality of life much more highly than
do people living in poverty in Calcutta—even though, of
course, they live in vastly more comfortable circumstances.
Most people, the world over, rate themselves as mildly
happy.
It’s admirable that people can find happiness in
circumstances of poverty as well as in circumstances of
plenty. That’s the resilience of the human spirit. But I don’t
think that a particular individual would be indifferent to the
disparities between the streets of Calcutta and the ranch
houses of Atlanta. The fact is, people aren’t made
deliriously happy by the luxuries of salt and cinnamon (once
so precious) or electricity or air-conditioning or cell phones
or the Internet, because they come to accept these onceluxury goods as part of ordinary existence. That doesn’t
mean, however, that because people have learned to take
clean water for granted, it no longer matters to their quality
of life. Indeed, if that were true, would it mean it would be
pointless to bother to try to improve the material
circumstances of those folks in Calcutta?
But as I went deeper into the mystery of money, I was
pulled toward research and analysis suitable for an entirely
different book, away from my most pressing interest. Sure, I
wanted to “Go off the path” to a point, and maybe one day I
would devote an entire book to the topic, but for the

moment, I didn’t have to solve the enigma of money. I just
needed to figure out how happiness and money fit together.
So was I arguing that “Money can buy happiness”? The
answer: no. That was clear. Money alone can’t buy
happiness.
But, as a follow-up, I asked myself, “Can money help buy
happiness?” The answer: yes, used wisely, it can. Whether
rich or poor, people make choices about how they spend
money, and those choices can boost happiness or
undermine it. It’s a mistake to assume that money will affect
everyone the same way. No statistical average could say
how a particular individual would be affected by money—
depending on that individual’s circumstances and
temperament. After a lot of thinking, I identified three
factors that shape the significance of money to individuals:

It depends on what kind of person you are.
Money has a different value to different people. You might
love to collect modern art, or you might love to rent old
movies. You might have six children and ailing, dependent
parents, or you might have no children and robust parents.
You might love to travel, or you might prefer to putter around
the house. You might care about eating organic, or you
might be satisfied with the cheapest choices at the grocery
store.

It depends on how you spend your money.
Some purchases are more likely to contribute to your
happiness than others. You might buy cocaine, or you might

buy a dog. You might splurge on a big-screen TV, or you
might splurge on a new bike.

It depends on how much money you have relative to the
people around you and relative to your own experience.
One person’s fortune is another person’s misfortune.
Developing and applying a three-factor test brought back
pleasant memories of being a law student, and it was a
helpful framework, but it was complex. I wanted a more
cogent way to convey the relationship between money and
happiness.
As I was mulling this over, one afternoon I picked up
Eleanor the wrong way as I leaned over her crib, and the
next morning, I woke up with agonizing back pain. For
almost a month, I couldn’t sit for long, I found it hard to type,
I had trouble sleeping, and of course I couldn’t stop picking
up Eleanor, so I kept reaggravating the injury.
“You should go see my physical therapist,” urged my
father-in-law, who had suffered from back problems for
years. “There’s a lot they can do.”
“I’m sure it will get better on its own,” I kept insisting.
One night as I struggled to turn over in bed, I thought,
“Ask for help! Bob says that physical therapy works; why
am I resisting?”
I called Bob at work, got the information, made an
appointment at the physical therapist’s office, and two visits
later, I was 100 percent better. It felt like a miracle. And one
day after my pain was gone, I took my health for granted

once again—and I had the Epiphany of the Back Spasm.
Money doesn’t buy happiness the way good health doesn’t
buy happiness.
When money or health is a problem, you think of little
else; when it’s not a problem, you don’t think much about it.
Both money and health contribute to happiness mostly in
the negative; the lack of them brings much more
unhappiness than possessing them brings happiness.
Being healthy doesn’t guarantee happiness. Lots of
healthy people are very unhappy. Many of them squander
their health or take it for granted. In fact, some people might
even be better off with some physical limitation that would
prevent them from making destructive choices. (I once went
on vacation with a group that included the most wild and
reckless guy I’d ever met, and I was quite relieved when he
broke his foot during an early escapade, because the
mishap prevented him from getting up to much more
mischief.) Ditto, money. But the fact that good health
doesn’t guarantee happiness doesn’t mean that good
health doesn’t matter to happiness. Similarly, money. Used
wisely, each can contribute greatly to happiness.
The First Splendid Truth holds that to think about
happiness, we should think about feeling good, feeling
bad, and feeling right, in an atmosphere of growth. Money
is most important for happiness in the “feeling bad”
category. People’s biggest worries include financial
anxiety, health concerns, job insecurity, and having to do
tiring and boring chores. Spent correctly, money can go a

long way to solving these problems. I was extremely
fortunate to be in a position where money wasn’t a source
o f feeling bad. We had plenty of money to do what we
wanted—even enough to feel secure, the toughest and
most precious thing for money to buy. I resolved to do a
better job of spending money in ways that could boost my
happiness by supporting the other three elements of
happiness.
INDULGE IN A MODEST SPLURGE.
I didn’t spend enough time thinking about how money could
buy me happiness.
I’d always had a vague sense that spending money was
self-indulgent and that I should avoid spending money
whenever possible. I once spent six very satisfying months
living in San Francisco on $5 a day (except when I had to
use the Laundromat). Now, however, I decided to find ways
to spend to further my happiness goals. Studies show that
people’s basic psychological needs include the need to
feel secure, to feel good at what they do, to be loved, to feel
connected to others, and to have a strong sense of control.
Money doesn’t automatically fill these requirements, but it
sure can help. People at every level of income can choose
to direct their spending in ways that take them closer to
happiness—or not.
I wanted to spend money to stay in closer contact with my
family and friends; to promote my energy and health; to

create a more serene environment in my apartment; to
work more efficiently; to eliminate sources of boredom,
irritation, and marital conflict; to support causes that I
thought important; and to have experiences that would
enlarge me. So, category by category, I looked for ways to
spend money to support my happiness goals—within
reason, of course.
For health and energy: in January, I’d already found a
way to spend money to get better exercise. My strengthtraining workouts were expensive, but I was happy to know
that I was doing something important for my long-term
health. I also started spending more for food when I had to
grab lunch outside our apartment. I’d always congratulated
myself when I ducked into a deli to buy a bagel, because it
was such a cheap and quick meal, but I stopped that.
Instead, I gave myself a mental gold star for getting a big
salad or soup and fruit, even though those choices were
much more expensive.
For relationships: I’d give a party for my sister’s wedding.
It would be a major expenditure but also a major source of
happiness. My relationship with my sister—and now with
her fiancé—were among the most important in my life, but
the fact that they lived in Los Angeles was a challenge.
Hosting a party would be a way to make my own
contribution to the wedding weekend.
For work: I bought some pens. Normally, I used makeshift
pens, the kind of unsatisfactory implements that somehow
materialized in my bag or in a drawer. But one day, when I
was standing in line to buy envelopes, I caught sight of a

box of my favorite kind of pen: the Deluxe Uniball Micro.
“Two ninety-nine for one pen!” I thought. “That’s
ridiculous.” But after a fairly lengthy internal debate, I bought
four.
It’s such a joy to write with a good pen instead of making
do with an underinked pharmaceutical promotional pen
picked up from a doctor’s office. My new pens weren’t
cheap, but when I think of all the time I spend using pens
and how much I appreciate a good pen, I realize it was
money well spent. Finely made tools help make work a
pleasure.
For others: I wrote a check to the New York Public
Library’s Library Cubs program. I was already donating my
time and energy to helping form this group, which supports
the children’s rooms in library branches. Time and energy
helped the library; money was also useful.
For happy memories: I bought those file boxes in April—
an excellent modest splurge. Also, I’ve never forgotten an
older friend’s observation: “One of my regrets about my
children’s childhoods is that I didn’t have more professional
photographs taken.” As luck would have it, I know a terrific
photographer. I arranged to have pictures taken of our
children, and I was thrilled with the results. These
photographs were far better than any snapshot I could take,
and I bought several for us and for the grandparents, too.
Remembering happy times gives a big boost to happiness,
and looking at photographs of happy times helps make
those memories more vivid. The money I spent on the
photographs will strengthen family bonds, enhance happy

memories, and capture fleeting moments of childhood.
That’s a pretty good return on the happiness investment.
I pushed a friend to “Buy some happiness” when I
stopped by her apartment to admire her new baby (in
keeping with my June resolution to “Show up”).
“One thing is really bothering me,” she said. “As a child, I
was close to my grandparents, but my in-laws, who live
nearby, aren’t very interested in the baby. They already
have seven grandchildren. My mother would love to see the
baby all the time, but she lives in Cleveland and only comes
to New York once a year.”
“Well,” I suggested, “at least until your son is in school,
why don’t you go to Cleveland every few months?”
She laughed. “That’s way too expensive.”
“It’s a lot of money, but it’s important to you. Could you
afford it?” I knew she could.
“Well, yes, I guess,” she admitted, “but it would be such a
hassle to fly with a baby.”
“You could tell your mother you’ll buy her plane tickets if
she’ll come to New York more often. Would she come?”
“You know…I bet she would!” my friend said. This
solution shows both the importance of thinking about how
money can buy happiness and also the importance of my
Eighth Commandment: “Identify the problem.” What was the
problem? Finding a way for grandmother and grandson to
spend time together.
Money, spent wisely, can support happiness goals of
strengthening relationships, promoting health, having fun,
and all the rest. At the same time, the emotions generated

by sheer buying, by acquisition, are also powerful.
Happiness theory suggests that if I move to a new
apartment or buy a new pair of boots, I’ll soon become
accustomed to my new possession and be no happier than
I was before. Nevertheless, many people make purchases
for the fleeting jolt of happiness they get from the very act of
gain.
Now, you might say—that’s not true happiness; true
happiness comes from doing good for others, being with
friends and family, finding flow, meditating, and so on. But
when I look around, I certainly see many people who look
and act happy as they do their buying. The fact that the
happiness boost that hits at the cash register isn’t
particularly admirable doesn’t mean that it’s not real—or
that it doesn’t shape people’s behavior. Research and
everyday experience show that receiving an unexpected
present or being surprised by a windfall gives people a real
boost; in one study, in fact, when researchers wanted to
induce a good mood in their subjects to study the effects,
the way they accomplished this good mood was to arrange
for those subjects to find coins in a telephone booth or to
be given bags of chocolates. For some people, the rush of
happiness that accompanies gain is so seductive that they
spend more money than they can afford and are hit by
remorse and anxiety once they get their bags home. The
quick fix of happiness turns into a longer-lasting
unhappiness.
The happiness that people get from buying stuff isn’t
attributable only to consumerist indulgence. Any kind of

gain creates at least a momentary atmosphere of growth,
and there are a lot of reasons why people love to make a
purchase: to keep their home in good repair, attractive, and
well stocked; to provide for loved ones or strangers; to
master something new (such as the latest gadget); to
possess an admired object; to teach their children; to live
as their peers live; to live differently from their peers; to
beautify themselves; to maintain a collection; to keep up
with fashion; to defy fashion; to support a hobby or
expertise; to benefit others; to justify the enjoyment of
shopping as an activity; to offer and return hospitality; to
give gifts and support; to win or maintain status; to
establish dominance and control; to express personality; to
celebrate; to maintain traditions; to break traditions; to
make life more convenient, healthier, or safer; to make life
more challenging, adventurous, or risky.
I myself rarely feel cash register happiness. Quite the
opposite. I’m usually hit by buyer’s remorse when I spend, a
feeling that I call “shop shock.” Perhaps that’s why I really
notice other people’s enthusiasm. Nevertheless, even for
me, indulging in a modest splurge could bring a lot of
happiness, if I made my purchases wisely.
When I posted on my blog about my resolution to “Indulge
in a modest splurge,” and people posted examples of their
own modest splurges, I was struck by the extraordinary
variety in people’s tastes.

For years I had cheap crappy cutlery in my kitchen. But last

year I “spent out” on a few good knives. I paid $200 for
three knives (a santoku, paring knife and a bread knife) and
they were soooo worth the money and will last me forever.
I hate to say it but I hired a personal organizer to deal
with our basement. There was an ad on the bulletin board in
the grocery store. My wife had been after me since we
moved to deal with the junk down there, which was three
years ago. I have never been so happy to write a check in
my life. It wasn’t even that expensive especially because we
ended up selling some stuff we had in storage in the
basement.
My Christmas present to myself this year was a few
pillows:-). I knew I didn’t like mine, but the chain reaction of
how they affect my comfort level-> hours and quality of
sleep -> my mood the next day -> my productivity in work
was pretty enlightening.
I got a dog. Having a pet turned out to be more
expensive than I expected (food, shots, paying a neighbor
to take care of her when I travel, and so forth) but it has also
been a lot more fun than I expected. I live by myself and
having a dog has brought me a huge amount of happiness.
For that matter, one of my own favorite “modest splurges”
was something that wouldn’t appeal to most people—but
for me meant getting my hands on something I’d coveted

for years. I called Books of Wonder, a famous children’s
bookstore in Manhattan, and ordered the “Wizard’s Super
Special,” the complete set of the fifteen Oz books by L.
Frank Baum. Two weeks later, I got a huge thrill when I
opened the large box. The hardback set had a unified
design, with matching spines, gorgeous covers, and the
original color illustrations.
Now, positive psychologists might argue that I’d adapt to
my purchase. Soon I’d be accustomed to owning these
books, they’d sit on a shelf and gather dust, and I’d be no
better off than I was before. I disagree. Because I have a
real passion for children’s literature, I knew these books
would give me a boost every time I saw them. After all, I
keep a big stack of the old, beat-up Cricket magazines I
had as a child, and just seeing them on the shelf makes me
happy.
As always, the secret was to “Be Gretchen” and to
choose wisely. What makes me happy is to spend money
on the things I value—and it takes self-knowledge and
discipline to discover what I really want, instead of parroting
the desires of other people. One of the purchases that
made my father happiest was a pinball machine. He’d
played hours of pinball as a boy, and one of his childhood
dreams was to have his own so he could play whenever he
wanted, for free. This isn’t a purchase that would have
made everyone happy, but it made him extremely happy.
While I was thinking hard about the relationship between
money and happiness, I struck up a conversation with a

fellow guest at a bridal shower. I told her that I was trying to
figure out ways to “Buy some happiness.” (As I explained
the issue, it began to dawn on me, dimly, that I might be
becoming a happiness bore.)
She became quite indignant at my suggestion. “That’s so
wrong!” she said. “Money can’t buy happiness!”
“You don’t think so?”
“I’m the perfect example. I don’t make much money. A
few years back, I took my savings and bought a horse. My
mother and everyone told me I was crazy. But that horse
makes me incredibly happy—even though I end up
spending all my extra money on him.”
“But,” I said, confused, “money did make you happy. It
makes you so happy to have a horse!”
“But I don’t have any money,” she answered. “I spent it
all.”
“Right, because you used it to buy a horse.”
She shook her head and gave up on me.
In some cases, though, when I tried to “Buy some
happiness,” it didn’t work. I’d call this the “expensive-gymmembership effect,” after the futile tendency to pay a lot for
a gym membership with the thought, “Gosh, this costs so
much, I’ll feel like I have to go to the gym!”
I see the expensive-gym-membership effect when I pay
money for something as a way to encourage myself to
make time for something fun. For example, I went to three
stores to hunt down the combination glue/sealer/ finish Mod
Podge, because I wanted to experiment with découpage. I
really want to do it. But I bought that Mod Podge ages ago,

and I’ve never used it. I want to take time for creative
projects, but merely spending money on an art supply won’t
make it a priority. I have to decide to make time—and
apparently I haven’t. (Using Mod Podge can be another
resolution for Happiness Project II.) Along the same lines, a
workaholic friend of mine bought a fancy new tennis
racquet because he wants to play more tennis, but he still
hasn’t used it. The tennis racquet is an expression of his
desire to change something in his life, but just making a
purchase won’t accomplish that. He should have
concentrated on fixing his calendar, not on finding the right
racquet.
“Buy some happiness,” of course, has its limits. I knew I’d
better not overlook the effects of the hedonic treadmill,
which quickly transforms delightful luxuries into dull
necessities. Indulging in a modest splurge would give me a
happiness jolt only if I did it rarely. Take room ser vice. Until
my honeymoon, I’d never had room ser vice in my life—and
it was a thrill. But if I traveled for business and got room ser
vice frequently, it wouldn’t be a treat anymore.
Because money permits a constant stream of luxuries
and indulgences, it can take away their savor, and by
permitting instant gratification, money shortcuts the
happiness of anticipation. Scrimping, saving, imagining,
planning, hoping—these stages enlarge the happiness we
feel.
Even a modest pleasure can be a luxury if it’s scarce

enough—ordering coffee at a restaurant, buying a book, or
watching TV—which is why deprivation is one of the most
effective, although unenjoyable, cures for the hedonic
treadmill. A friend told me that when she lived in Russia in
the 1990s, the hot water would periodically stop working for
weeks at a time. She said that very few experiences in her
life have matched the happiness she felt on the days when
the hot water started working again. But now that she’s
back in the United States, where her hot water has never
failed, she never thinks about it.
The hedonic treadmill means that spending often isn’t a
satisfying path to happiness, but nevertheless, money can
help. My father still talks about the day he realized that he
could afford to pay someone to mow the lawn. Some of the
best things in life aren’t free.
Another way to think about money’s effect is in terms of
the First Splendid Truth, as part of the “atmosphere of
growth” that’s so important to happiness. We need an
atmosphere of spiritual growth, and as much as some
people deny it, material growth is also very satisfying.
We’re very sensitive to change. We measure our present
against our past, and we’re made happy when we see
change for the better. In one study, people were asked
whether they’d rather have a job that paid $30,000 in year
one, $40,000 in year two, and $50,000 in year three or a
job that paid $60,000, then $50,000 then $40,000. In
general, people preferred the first option, with its raises—
despite the fact that at the end of the three years, they
would have earned only $120,000 instead of $150,000.

Their decision might seem irrational, but in fact, the people
who chose the first option understood the importance of
growth to happiness. People are very sensitive to relative
changes in their condition, for better or worse.
A sense of growth is so important to happiness that it’s
often preferable to be progressing to the summit rather than
to be at the summit. Neither a scientist nor a philosopher
but a novelist, Lisa Grunwald, came up with the most
brilliant summation of this happiness principle: “Best is
good, better is best.”
One challenge of parenthood that I hadn’t tackled in April,
though perhaps I should have, was setting limits on buying
treats for my children. For example, as a surprise, I bought
Eliza a big book of optical illusions. As I expected, she
loved the book—pored over it, looked at it with her friends,
kept it out on her bedside table. I was so pleased with
myself for choosing it for her. One day, not long after, I was
in a drugstore that had a rack of cheap children’s books. I
spotted a book of optical illusions and almost bought it for
Eliza; she’d enjoyed the other book so much. Then I
stopped myself. She already had a book with three hundred
illusions; this book probably didn’t have much new. But
even beyond that, I wondered if having two books of optical
illusions might, in fact, dim Eliza’s pleasure in the first book.
It wouldn’t seem as magical and definitive.
The head of Eliza’s school told a story about a four-yearold who had a blue toy car he loved. He took it everywhere,
played with it constantly. Then when his grandmother came
to visit, she bought him ten toy cars, and he stopped

playing with the cars altogether. “Why don’t you play with
your cars?” she asked. “You loved your blue car so much.” “I
can’t love lots of cars,” he answered.
It’s easy to make the mistake of thinking that if you have
something you love or there’s something you want, you’ll be
happier with more.
BUY NEEDFUL THINGS.
When I began to pay attention to people’s relationship to
money, I recognized two different approaches to buying:
“underbuying” and “overbuying.” I’m an underbuyer.
As an underbuyer, I delay making purchases or buy as
little as possible. I buy saline solution, which I use twice a
day, one little bottle at a time. I scramble to buy items like a
winter coat or a bathing suit after the point at which I need
them. I’m suspicious of buying things with very specific
uses—suit bags, hand cream, hair conditioner, rain boots,
Kleenex (why not just use toilet paper to blow your nose?). I
often consider buying an item, then decide, “I’ll get this
some other time” or “Maybe we don’t really need this.” As
an underbuyer, I often feel stressed because I don’t have
the things I need. I make a lot of late-night runs to the
drugstore. I’m surrounded with things that are shabby, don’t
really work, or aren’t exactly suitable.
I gaze in wonder at the antics of my overbuyer friends.
Overbuyers often lay in huge supplies of slow-use items like
shampoo or cough medicine. They buy things like tools or

high-tech gadgets with the thought “This will probably come
in handy someday.” They make a lot of purchases before
they go on a trip or celebrate a holiday. They throw things
away—milk, medicine, even cans of soup—because
they’ve hit their expiration date. They buy items with the
thought “This will make a great gift!” without having a
recipient in mind. Like me, overbuyers feel stressed.
They’re oppressed by the number of errands they feel
obliged to do and by the clutter and waste often created by
their overbuying.
After I posted about these two approaches, many
underbuyers and overbuyers posted comments. People
had no trouble recognizing themselves in my descriptions.

I tend to be an overbuyer because underbuying makes me
feel stressed and disorganized. I like it when my girls have
more than enough pairs of tights, when we have a twoweek supply of paper towels on hand, when I have a full
bottle of shampoo at the ready should I run out. Running out
of tissues or milk or diapers makes me feel like a poor
excuse for a mother. I love that feeling of coming home from
Costco and putting everything away and feeling fully
stocked.
I’m an underbuyer, and those 15-year-old L.L. Bean
pajamas were just fine until the day all of the elastic fell out,
all at once…

I’m a huge underbuyer and used to feel very proud of
myself because of it. That was until I realized it was more of
an obsession than a choice. I rarely have backup supplies
like toothpaste or soap. I usually leave buying the backups
until just hours before I’m about to run out. I used to be a
performer so I think that’s where I got my frugal training. But
now it’s hard to break this pattern. However, I’m happy to
say that I recently let myself buy 6 rolls of paper towels
instead of the 2 pack I usually get and also 3 new
facecloths. And all of sudden I felt incredibly wealthy. I was
surprised at how giddy I became with such simple things.
I knew that I’d be happier if I made a mindful effort to
thwart my underbuying impulse and instead worked to buy
what I needed. For instance, I ended my just-in-time policy
for restocking toilet paper. One of my Secrets of Adulthood
is “Keep a roll of toilet paper tucked away someplace,” so
we never actually ran out, but we teetered on the dreary
brink.
I mentioned this problem to Jamie. “We’re like Walmart,”
he said. “We keep all our capital working for us instead of
sitting on a lot of inventory.”
“Well,” I said, “now we’re going to invest in some
redundant supply.” Moderation is pleasant to the wise, but
toilet paper was something I wanted to keep on hand. This
kind of little annoyance puts a surprisingly big drag on
happiness. As Samuel Johnson remarked, “To live in
perpetual want of little things is a state, not indeed of

torture, but of constant vexation.”
Another thing that I really needed was white T-shirts,
because I wear them practically every day. I enjoy shopping
only when I’m with my mother, so I waited to buy my T-shirts
until my mother was visiting from Kansas City. I wanted Tshirts that were soft, stretchy, not too thin, V-necked, and
long-sleeved, and to me, tracking down and buying such
shirts seemed like an overwhelming challenge. My mother
was undaunted. “We’ll go to Bloomingdale’s,” she decided.
Though I felt dazed the minute I entered the store, my
mother walked purposefully from one area to the next. As
she began her systematic inspection, I trailed along behind
her and carried the shirts she’d pulled out. After she’d
considered every white shirt on the floor, I tried on—
conservative estimate—twenty shirts. I bought eight.
My mother had joined with zeal my quest for the perfect
white T-shirt, but when she saw the stack of monochrome
cotton at the cash register, she asked, “Are you sure you
don’t want any other colors or styles? This is a lot of white
shirts.”
“Well…” I hesitated. Did I really want this many white
shirts? Then I remembered a study showing that people
think they like variety more than they do. When asked to
pick a menu of snacks for the upcoming weeks, they
picked a variety, but if they chose week to week what to
eat, they picked their favorite snack over and over.
In the store, it seemed like a good idea to have a variety
of colors. But I knew from experience that when I stood in
front of my closet, I always wanted to pull out the same

things: white V-neck T-shirt; black yoga pants or jeans; and
running shoes.
Buy needful things. “Yes, I just want white,” I said firmly.
Inspired by my shirt success, I replaced our leaky
blender. I bought a personalized return-address stamp. I’d
realized that the paradoxical consequence of being an
underbuyer was that I had to shop more often, while buying
extras meant fewer trips to the cash register. I bought
batteries, Band-Aids, lightbulbs, diapers—things I knew we
would need eventually. I finally ordered business cards,
which I’d been putting off for years. I was inspired when, at
a meeting, someone handed me the best-looking business
card I’d ever seen. I got all the information so I could order a
copycat version for myself.
My decision-making process for ordering a business
card showed me that not only was I an “underbuyer,” I was
also a “satisficer”—as opposed to a “maximizer.”
Satisficers (yes, satisficers) are those who make a
decision or take action once their criteria are met. That
doesn’t mean they’ll settle for mediocrity; their criteria can
be very high, but as soon as they find the hotel, the pasta
sauce, or the business card that has the qualities they want,
they’re satisfied. Maximizers want to make the optimal
decision. Even if they see a bicycle or a backpack that
meets their requirements, they can’t make a decision until
after they’ve examined every option, so they can make the
best possible choice.
Studies suggest that satisficers tend to be happier than
maximizers. Maximizers spend a lot more time and energy

to reach a decision, and they’re often anxious about
whether they did in fact make the best choice. As a
shopper, my mother is a good example of what I’d call a
“happy limited maximizer.” In certain distinct categories,
she’s a maximizer, and she loves the very process of
investigating every possibility. Now that Eliza and Eleanor
were going to be flower girls in my sister’s wedding, I knew
my mother would love nothing more than to examine every
possible dress, just for the fun of it. But too often
maximizers find the research process exhausting yet can’t
let themselves settle for anything but the best. The
difference between the two approaches may be one
reason some people find a big city like New York
disheartening. If you’re a maximizer in New York City, you
could spend months surveying your options for bedroom
furniture or even wooden hangers. In Kansas City, even the
most zealous maximizer can size up the available options
pretty quickly.
Most people are a mix of both. In almost every category, I
was a satisficer, and in fact, I often felt guilty about not
doing more research before making decisions. In law
school, one friend interviewed with fifty law firms before she
decided where she wanted to go as a summer associate; I
think I interviewed with six. We ended up at the same firm.
Once I learned to call myself a “satisficer,” I felt more
satisfied with my approach to decision making; instead of
feeling lazy and unconscientious, I could call myself prudent.
A great example of reframing.

SPEND OUT.
I tend to cling to things—to stuff, to ideas. I reuse razor
blades until they’re dull, I keep my toothbrushes until they’re
yellowed and frayed. There is a preppy wabi-sabi to soft,
faded khakis and cotton shirts, but it’s not nice to be
surrounded by things that are worn out or stained or used
up. I often found myself saving things, even when it made no
sense. Like those white T-shirts I bought. I’d surmounted
the challenge of buying them; then came the challenge of
wearing them. When I took them out of the shopping bag
and laid them on my shelf—perfectly folded by the
salesclerk as I’ve never learned to do—I could feel myself
wanting to “save” them in their pristine glory. But not
wearing clothes is as wasteful as throwing them away.
As part of my happiness project I wanted to stop
hoarding, to trust in abundance, so that I could use things
up, give things away, throw things away. Not only that—I
wanted to stop worrying so much about keeping score and
profit and loss. I wanted to spend out.
A few years ago, my sister gave me a box of beautiful
stationery for my birthday. I loved it, but I’d never used it.
When I was mailing some photos to the grandparents, I
hesitated to use the new stationery because I was “saving”
it; but to what better use could it be put? Of course I should
use those notes. Spend out.
I looked through my apartment for ways to spend out. The
toughest choices I made concerned things that sort of

worked: the camera that had lost its zoom function, the
label maker that didn’t print properly. I hate waste, but it
would probably have cost me as much money (and far
more time) to repair these items as to replace them—and
using them in their crippled states weighed me down. I
replaced them.
My goal wasn’t limited to my treatment of my
possessions; it also involved my ideas. For example, when
I thought of a great subject for a blog post, I often found
myself thinking “That’s a good idea, save it for another
day.” Why? Why delay? I needed to trust that there would
be more, that I would have great ideas in the future and so
should use my best stuff now. Pouring out ideas is better for
creativity than doling them out by the teaspoon.
“Spending out” also meant not being rigidly efficient. The
other night, Jamie and I rented Junebug—an extraordinary
movie, all about the nature of love and happiness. I was
tempted to watch a few of my favorite scenes again after
we saw it the first time, but I decided that would be a
“waste” of time. Then I remembered my resolution, which
included spending out my time. After all, I know that
sometimes the things I do when I’m wasting time turn out to
be quite worthwhile. I went to “Scene Selection” to re-watch
the scene at the church social.
The most important meaning of “Spend out,” however, is
not to be a scorekeeper, not to stint on love and generosity.
This was related to my February resolution, “Don’t expect
praise or appreciation.” I wanted to stop constantly
demanding praise or insisting on getting paid back. Saint

Thérèse of Lisieux wrote, “When one loves, one does not
calculate.” I’m a big calculator, always looking for a return,
especially with Jamie.
“I gave Eleanor a bath last night, so you…”
“I let you take a nap, so you…”
“I had to make the plane reservations, so you…”
No! Spend out. Don’t think about the return. “It is by
spending oneself,” the actress Sarah Bernhardt remarked,
“that one becomes rich.” What’s more, one intriguing study
showed that Sarah Bernhardt’s pronouncement is literally
true: people who give money to charity end up wealthier
than those who don’t give to charity. After doing complex
number crunching to control for different variables, a
researcher concluded that charitable giving isn’t just
correlated with higher income; it actually causes higher
income. Some explanations for this surprising effect
include the brain stimulation caused by charitable activity
and also the fact that those who are seen behaving
charitably are likely to be elevated to leadership positions.
It’s certainly true in my household that spending out
creates a wealth of love and tenderness, while calculation
and scorekeeping build resentment.
To keep this important yet elusive resolution uppermost
in my mind, I maintained a relic. In one of my last visits to
my grandmother before she died, I picked up the My Sin
perfume that had been sitting on her bureau for as long as I
could remember. The bottle was still in its box, and when I
opened it, I saw that it was still full to the top. I didn’t ask her

about it, but I’m sure someone, many years ago, gave her
that bottle of perfume and she was “saving it.” For what?
After she died, I took the box home with me, and I keep it in
my office to remind me to “Spend out.”
I posted on my blog about that bottle of perfume, and
several readers responded with their own experiences of
“spending out.”

Your story reminds me of some pretty linen napkins that I
found in my mother’s house after she died. I lived in that
house for a LONG time and never even SAW those
napkins. She was apparently “saving” them. For what, I
have no idea. But she never did get to use them. Now
they’re mine and I’m sure as heck gonna use them the next
time I have someone over for dinner, which come to think of
it, is tomorrow night!
Life is too short to save your good china or your good
lingerie or your good ANYTHING for later because truly,
later may never come.
I can’t believe that there is someone else out there that
does this, too! I have struggled with this for years. I realized
it WAS contributing to my mental dismalness! I thought I
should be keeping some of my new, better stuff just in case
of (so pessimistic, here!) “bad days ahead.” Sadly, I found
that I have even pushed it over on my own daughter (i.e.,
don’t use up all the battery power in your toys!). I think that’s
when I realized it. Now, I am on the track to using it all up

today…’cause who knows about tomorrow!
I learned this lesson painfully. When I was a child, my
grandparents gave me a very elaborate box of art supplies
for Hanukkah—really beautiful paints, brushes, chalks,
paper, etc. I kept “saving it,” planning to use it only once I
was a better artist, because I didn’t want to waste any of
these treasures. (As a kid, you really do see yourself
getting more skillful, so this wasn’t totally crazy.) One day, I
happened to look for the box, and couldn’t find it. My mother
said, “Oh, you never touched that art set, so I figured you
weren’t interested.” She’d taken it to the thrift shop! I was
crushed. But I’ve never forgotten it. Sometimes “later”
becomes “never.”

GIVE SOMETHING UP.
Sometimes something that makes you happy also makes
you unhappy, like smoking cigarettes, having one more
cupcake, staying up until 3:00 A.M. to watch The Godfather
for the fifth time, and—surely one of the most popular
happy/unhappy activities—shopping. Many people get a
big kick out of buying things, but once they’re home, cash
register happiness changes to remorse and guilt.
Although I’m generally an underbuyer, every once in a
while I do switch to a “Buy” setting; a friend once described
this as my “drive-by shopping mode.” This happened when

we moved to our current apartment. For the first time, I had
my own little home office, and I went nuts outfitting it. I
bought a complicated desk chair, a wooden desktop
organizer, special boxes to hold my supplies, all kinds of
mailing envelopes and elaborate notebooks and sticky
pads, fancy rubber bands printed with patterns, a headset
for my phone, an extra battery for my laptop, anything I
could think of.
It was after I bought a magnetic paper clip holder shaped
like a little chirping bird that I started to feel guilty about the
amount of stuff I was accumulating. I resolved to “Give
something up.” I had everything I really needed, and I made
a rule for myself: no more purchases for the office. I cut that
category of spending out altogether—and it felt good to say
no to myself and to stop buying. Enough.
When I wrote a blog post about my experience of
resolving to “Give something up,” someone wrote to say,
“It’s better to focus on the positive. Instead of telling yourself
‘no’ or ‘never’ or ‘don’t,’ focus on what you want, and be
moderate. Otherwise you’re just setting yourself up to
backslide and fail.”
That’s a good point to keep in mind, but I don’t agree that
it’s always true. First of all, when I’m trying to give
something up, I find it easier to give it up entirely than to try
to indulge moderately. Also, sometimes it feels good to
say, “I’m going to stop!” “No more!” “Maybe tomorrow, but
not today.” Happiness experts point out that merely making
and sticking to a decision is a source of happiness,
because it gives you a feeling of control, of efficacy, of

responsibility. At times of financial stress in particular,
taking control of your finances—even symbolically—can
boost your mood because you’re taking steps to control
and improve your situation. At a time when I was feeling
anxious about the expenditures related to our new
apartment, it was comforting to refuse to spend any more in
one particular area. (This wasn’t really economically
rational, because buying one kitchen chair dwarfed my
savings on a stapler, but it was psychologically effective,
nevertheless.)
I asked blog readers if anyone had ever boosted his or
her happiness by giving up a category of purchases
entirely, and many people posted about their own forfeits:
“grabbing a Cinnabon in airports—so expensive and so
unhealthy,” “owning a car,” “lottery tickets,” “printed
periodicals—now I read newspapers and magazines online only,” and “trading up to get the latest cell phone.”

W hen I moved into my current place, about a year and a
half ago, I didn’t subscribe to cable TV. Which meant I had
no broadcast TV at all. Since then, TV watching has been
“Netflix or nothing.”
It was a choice based on frugality that had a
philosophical savor to it. When that level of frugality is no
longer necessary to reach my financial goals, I’ll re-evaluate
—but dollars to donuts, even if I resubscribe to cable I’ll still
watch less than I did before.

-bottled water
-no sugar-based snacks at work
-eating out at any time other than Friday/Saturday nights
As a result, the wife and I are losing weight and saving
money.
No more buying things on eBay. At first it was fun but
then it started to get out of hand. I was ending up with things
I didn’t really need or want, because I loved looking around
and making discoveries. It was showing up in my wallet
however. One day I clicked on the site and said to myself,
“No more!” It has really been a relief. Plus I hadn’t realized
what an amount of time it was using.
Readers also mentioned that they’d been happy to give
up things unrelated to spending, such as “sleeping until
noon on the weekends,” “checking TMZ.com,” “eating
cereal,” and “sunbathing.”

I have a story to tell about feeling happier as a result of
giving up something.
About five years ago, I got a job at a local animal shelter.
At the time I began my job, I was a big-time carnivore.
However, the longer I worked at the shelter, the more I
became uncomfortable with the fact that I was eating
SOME animals at the same time that I was saving
OTHERS. I was being irrational. More importantly, I was

also being inhumane.
A few of my coworkers were vegans, and I soon joined
them. I don’t eat meat, dairy products, or eggs. I don’t buy
clothing made from fur, leather, or wool. I’ve read Gary
Taubes’s book ( Good Calories, Bad Calories), so I’m not
certain whether my diet produces any dramatic benefits in
my health. But I do know that my behavior is now more
consistent with my moral code. I also know that no matter
what kind of a day I had, at the very least I can go to bed
knowing that I did not contribute to the exploitation of
sentient creatures.
I gave up processed sugar. This has been difficult, but
not exactly for the reasons I thought it would be. I am a
candy addict. I thought I would miss my Skittles and
Starbursts and Life Savers and Twizzlers and Rainblo gum
balls like crazy! But because I really went cold turkey—and
TOLD PEOPLE about my plan—it has not been so tough.
No negotiations, no little bits here and there—just, NO. I am
still getting used to taking my coffee black, though. Such a
change from 5–7 Splendas! 34 days later, is it worth it?
YES! This is my one and only life.
Obviously, people’s choices will be different. Just
because I’m happier when I don’t buy office equipment
doesn’t mean that other people should stop buying
highlighters. But although the resolution to “Give something
up” may sound severe and spartan, it can feel good to

choose to forgo something.
Samuel Butler wrote, “Happiness and misery consist in a
progression towards better or worse; it does not matter
how high up or low down you are, it depends not on this, but
on the direction in which you are tending.” This seems the
key to understanding the relationship between money and
happiness.
However, because people differ wildly from one another
in how they respond to money and the things it can
purchase, it’s practically impossible to make
generalizations. Take my blender. When I replaced our
leaky blender, I splurged and bought a very expensive, very
powerful blender. For me, because I make smoothies every
day, this blender is a daily joy. For a person who never
cooks, a fancy blender would be nothing but a means of
conspicuous consumption; he’d never give it another
thought after buying it, and it wouldn’t add to his happiness.
If money is to enhance your happiness, it must be used to
support aspects of life that themselves bring happiness to

you.
Money. It’s a good servant but a bad master.
It was during this month, in the midst of trying to
understand the mysteries of money, that I had a bout of
happiness project despair.
It had been a horrible Saturday morning. We were all in
bad moods. Jamie had let me sleep late, which was nice,
but my morning went downhill from the moment I emerged

from the bedroom. After I’d had a cup of coffee, he asked if
he could go to the gym, and I said yes—but I was
simmering with resentment. Once he left, Eliza and Eleanor
played nicely together for about five minutes, then started
poking, teasing, and yelling.
At the nadir, Eleanor was throwing a tantrum—lying on
the floor, kicking her feet, beating her fists against the floor,
and shrieking. Why? “Eliza looked at me!” Eliza joined in,
sobbing, “It’s not my fault! I hate it when she cries!”
All my happiness project resolutions started flashing
through my mind, but I didn’t want to “Sing in the morning”
or “Take time to be silly” or “Give proofs of love.” I wanted
someone to worry about making me feel better. I’d been
trying so hard to keep my resolutions, but was it working?
No. Nothing about me had changed. But if I abandoned my
resolutions, what were my options? I could sit on the floor
and start howling. I could walk away from the girls, get into
bed, and read a book. But would I be happier if I did? No.
Minutes passed, and none of us seemed able to move. I
was furious at Jamie for being at the gym. Eleanor kept
crying, Eliza kept crying, I stood in the doorway.
“This is ridiculous!” I yelled. “Both of you, stop it! You’re
crying about nothing!” Eleanor cried harder, Eliza cried
harder. I fought back the urge to smack each of them.
“Don’t yell at me!” Eliza wailed. “It’s not my fault!” Eleanor
rotated her body on the floor so she could start kicking the
walls instead.
I had to do something. It took every ounce of moral
strength that I possessed to say, “Crying makes a person

thirsty. I’m going to get you each a glass of water.” (Both
girls love to drink water.)
I went to the kitchen. First I opened a can of Diet Coke
for myself; then I poured two glasses of water. I took a deep
breath and tried to sound cheerful. “Who’s thirsty? Does
anyone want some almonds?” I crossed my fingers.
Eliza and Eleanor straggled into the kitchen, sniffling
melodramatically. They each took a drink of water and a
few almonds. Then they sat down and drank more water
and ate more almonds. Suddenly the mood lightened a bit.
“Hey,” I said to Eliza, “did you eat much breakfast?”
“No,” she said. “We started playing with the My Little
Ponies.”
“Note to self,” I said, “don’t let you two get too hungry.” I
started laughing hysterically, and the girls stared at me as
they munched away.
That bad moment passed, but the rest of the day was
hardly better. Eliza and Eleanor kept squabbling, Jamie
and I kept bickering. Everybody was getting on my nerves.
That afternoon, while I was trying to prod the girls into
tidying up the dozens of crayons that they’d scattered over
the kitchen floor, I suddenly noticed that Jamie had
vanished. “Jamie!” I yelled a few times, then went to hunt
him down. I was enraged to find him fast asleep in the
flying-Superman position on our bed. My scorekeeping
kept running through my head: I got to sleep late, he got to
go the gym, why did he get to take a nap, too? What was I
going to get in return? “Remember,” my conscience
whispered, “no calculation.” I ignored it.

My happiness project was making me feel worse, not
better. I was acutely aware of all the mistakes I was making
and the steps I could be taking—but I just couldn’t. I
wouldn’t. To hell with the resolutions. Why was I even
bothering with the resolutions? Many of them were actually
directed at making other people happier, and no one
appreciated my efforts, no one even noticed. I was
particularly mad at Jamie. Did he ask me about my
research? Did he utter one word of gratitude for the clean
closets, the sweet e-mails, the decline in nagging? Nope.
I could hear the girls in the next room. “Mine!” “No, mine!”
“Well, I was playing with it!” “Don’t push!” “You hurt my arm!”
And so on.
I stormed into Jamie. “Get up! Are you just going to listen
to that? Do you enjoy hearing that shrieking and hitting?”
Jamie rolled over and rubbed his eyes. He fixed me with
a look that I interpreted to mean “I’m waiting for you to get
yourself under control.”
“Don’t just lie there, this is your problem, too,” I snapped
at him.
“What is?”
“Listen to Eliza and Eleanor! They’ve been like this all
day. You fix it!”
“I’m sorry I’m not being helpful,” he said. “I just don’t know
exactly what to do.”
“So you figured you’d wait for me to deal with it.”
“Of course,” he said, smiling. He held out his arms to me.
(I knew from my February research that this was a “repair

attempt.”)
“Are you giving me a gold star?” I lay down next to him on
the bed.
“Yes,” he said. The yelling from the girls got louder, then
ominously quiet. “Ah, the happy sounds of home.” We both
started laughing.
“Are we in harmony?” he asked. “Even if I am a slacker
napping husband?”
“I guess,” I said. I put my head against his chest.
“I’ll tell you what, let’s go to the park. We need to get
outdoors.” He sat up and yelled, “Put your shoes on, you
two! We’re going to the park.”
This announcement was greeted with wails of
indignation: “Don’t wanna put on shoes!” “I don’t want to go
the park!”
“Well, you’re going to. I’ll help you both get ready.”
It was one of those days—and there would be others. A
happiness project was no magic charm. But that night I did
manage to keep one resolution, “Go to sleep earlier,” and
in the morning, things looked a little better. Although it took
several days before my bad mood lifted completely, at least
I was ready to tackle my resolutions again.

8
AUGUST
Contemplate the Heavens

ETERNITY

Read memoirs of catastrophe.
Keep a gratitude notebook.
Imitate a spiritual master.

I’d

become firmly convinced that money could help buy
happiness. Still, there was something unappealing about
thinking about money too much; it made me feel grasping
and small-minded. By the end of July, I was relieved to turn
from the worldly subject of money to the spiritual realm.
I figured August was a particularly good time to focus on
eternal things, because we’d be taking our family vacation.
Stepping out of my usual routine would allow me to see
more clearly the transcendent values that underlay everyday
life. First, however, I had to figure out exactly what I wanted
to achieve in my contemplation of eternity.
My upbringing wasn’t religious. As a child, I went to
Sunday school when I visited my grandparents in
Nebraska, and we celebrated Christmas and Easter with

lots of decorations, but that was the extent of it. Then I
married Jamie, who is Jewish. His upbringing had been
about as religious as mine, and since we now had a
“mixed” household, we had even less religion at home. We
celebrated Christian holidays with my parents and Jewish
holidays with his parents (which made both sets of parents
very happy, because they never had to switch off ) and
observed all holiday traditions in a very secular, Hallmark-y
way.
Nevertheless, I’ve always been interested in learning
about religion and in the experiences of devout people. I’d
describe myself as a reverent agnostic. I’m attracted to
belief, and through my reading, I enter into the spirit of
belief. Also, although I’d never thought of myself as
particularly spiritual, I’d come to see that spiritual states—
such as elevation, awe, gratitude, mindfulness, and
contemplation of death—are essential to happiness.
When I mentioned to Jamie that my focus for August was
“Eternity,” he asked suspiciously, “You’re not going to
engage in a lot of morbid activities, are you?”
That actually sounded intriguing.
“I don’t think so,” I answered. “Like what?”
“I have no idea,” he said. “But contemplating eternity
sounds like something that might get tiresome for the rest
of the family.”
“No,” I assured him. “No skulls on the coffee table, I
promise.”
But I had to find some way to steer my mind toward the
transcendent and the timeless, away from the immediate

and the shallow. I wanted to cultivate a contented and
thankful spirit. I wanted to appreciate the glories of the
present moment and my ordinary life. I wanted to put the
happiness of others before my own happiness. Too often,
these eternal values got lost in the hubbub of everyday
routines and selfish concerns.
Will focusing on spiritual matters make you happier?
According to the research, yes. Studies show that spiritual
people are relatively happier; they’re more mentally and
physically healthy, deal better with stress, have better
marriages, and live longer.
READ MEMOIRS OF CATASTROPHE.
I n AD 524, while in prison awaiting execution, the
philosopher Boethius wrote, “Contemplate the extent and
stability of the heavens, and then at last cease to admire
worthless things.” The challenges to my serenity were
insignificant compared to execution, of course, but I wanted
to cultivate the same sense of perspective so I could
remain unruffled by petty annoyances and setbacks. I
wanted to strengthen myself so I’d have the fortitude to face
the worst, if (i.e., when) I had to. To achieve this, the great
religious and philosophic minds urge us to think about
death. As the Buddha counseled, “Of all mindfulness
meditations, that on death is supreme.”
But I wasn’t sure how to go about meditating on death.
Medieval monks kept images of skeletons in their cells

as memento mori. Sixteenth-century vanitas artists painted
still lifes that included symbols of the brevity of life and the
certainty of death, like guttering candles, hourglasses,
rotten fruit, and bubbles. What could I do to achieve the
heightened awareness that death and catastrophe bring—
without putting that skull on the coffee table?
I hit on a memento mori that suited me: I’d read memoirs
by people facing death.
I went to the library and checked out an enormous stack
of books. I started by collecting accounts by people
grappling with serious illness and death, but then I
broadened my search to include any kind of catastrophe:
divorce, paralysis, addiction, and all the rest. I hoped that it
would be possible for me to benefit from the knowledge
that these people had won with so much pain, without
undergoing the same ordeals. There are some kinds of
profound wisdom that I hope never to gain from my own
experience.
August was a month of sunshine and vacation, which,
because it made such a stark contrast to the dark
confidences of these books, was probably the best
backdrop. The reassurance of being with my family made it
easier to experience vicariously so much unhappiness and
loss.
As we were packing for a trip to the beach, Jamie
glanced at a few of the books I’d stuffed into our battered
duffel bag.
“Is this really what you want to be reading while we’re
away?” he said doubtfully as he scanned the book jackets.

“Stan Mack on cancer, Gene O’Kelly on brain tumors, and
Martha Beck on having a baby with Down syndrome?”
“I know, it seems like it would be incredibly depressing to
read these books, but it’s not. It’s sad, but it’s also—well, I
hate to say ‘uplifting,’ but they are uplifting.”
“Okay,” he shrugged, “whatever. I’m taking A Bright
Shining Lie and Middlemarch.”
By the end of our trip, I’d finished every book I’d packed. I
didn’t agree with Tolstoy’s observation that “Happy families
are all alike,” but perhaps it was true that “every unhappy
family is unhappy in its own way.” Although many of these
memoirs described a similar circumstance—grappling with
a life-threatening condition—each was memorable for its
story of unique suffering.
As a consequence of reading these accounts, I found
myself with a greatly heightened appreciation for my
ordinary existence. Everyday life seems so permanent and
unshakable—but, as I was reminded by these writers, it can
be destroyed by a single phone call. One memoir after
another started with a recitation of the specific moment
when a person’s familiar life ended forever. Gilda Radner
wrote, “On October 21, 1986, I was diagnosed with ovarian
cancer.” “The call comes at 7:00 P.M. The tumor is
malignant and inoperable.” Cornelius Ryan recalled July 23,
1970: “On this soft morning I think I must begin to
acknowledge the distinct possibility that I am dying…. The
diagnosis changes everything.”
Reading these accounts also gave me a new and
intense appreciation for my obedient body—for the simple

ability to eat or walk or even pee in the usual fashion. Being
on vacation pulled me off my usual eating routine, and I
found myself indulging in potato chips, milk shakes, grilled
cheese sandwiches, and other treats that I wouldn’t
ordinarily eat. One morning I felt dejected because I’d
gained a few pounds. But having just finished an account by
a prostate cancer survivor made me feel far more kindly to
my own body. Instead of feeling perpetually dissatisfied
with my weight, I should delight in feeling vital, healthy, painfree, fear-free.
A common theme in religion and philosophy, as well as
in catastrophe memoirs, is the admonition to live fully and
thankfully in the present. So often, it’s only after some
calamity strikes that we appreciate what we had. “There
are times in the lives of most of us,” observed William
Edward Hartpole Lecky, “when we would have given all the
world to be as we were but yesterday, though that
yesterday had passed over us unappreciated and
unenjoyed.”
As I became more aware of the preciousness of ordinary
life, I was overwhelmed by the desire to capture the floods
of moments that passed practically unnoticed. I never used
to think much about the past, but having children has made
me much more wistful about the passage of time. Today I’m
pushing Eleanor in a stroller; one day she’ll be pushing me
in a wheelchair. Will I then remember my present life? I
couldn’t get a line from Horace out of my head: “The years
as they pass plunder us of one thing after another.”

I decided to start a one-sentence journal. I knew I couldn’t
write lyrical prose for forty-five minutes each morning in a
beautiful notebook (and my handwriting is so bad that I
wouldn’t be able to read it afterward if I did), but I could
manage to type one or two sentences into my computer
each night.
This journal became a place to record the fleeting
moments that make life sweet but that so easily vanish from
memory. It also helped me amplify the effect of happy
experiences by giving me an opportunity to observe the
third and fourth prongs of the Four Stages of Happiness, by
expressing and recalling my feelings. Even after this
summer had faded into the past, I’d have a way to remind
myself of unmemorable but lovely moments—the night
Jamie invented a new kind of pie or Eliza’s first trip alone to
the grocery store. I can’t imagine forgetting the time when
Eleanor pointed to her spaghetti and said politely, “Mo’
pajamas, please,” when she meant “Parmesan,” but I will.
On our last day at the beach, when we were packed up
and ready to leave, Jamie and I sat reading the newspaper
as we all waited for the ferry. Eleanor wandered off to
practice her stair climbing on a short set of three stairs, so I
went to help her climb up and down, up and down. I
considered going to get a section of the paper to read as I
stood with her—and then I realized, this is it.
This was my precious, fleeting time with Eleanor as a
little girl, so adorable and cheery and persistent, as she
went up and down those wooden stairs. The sun was
shining, the flowers were blooming, she looked so darling

in her pink summer dress; why would I want to distract
myself from the moment by reading the paper? She’d
already grown so much; we’d never have a tiny baby again.
I’d had this thought before—but suddenly I grasped that
this was my Third Splendid Truth: The days are long, but
the years are short. It sounds like something from a fortune
cookie, but it’s true. Each day, each phase of life seems
long, but the years pass so quickly; I wanted to appreciate
the present time, the seasons, this time of life. With Eliza,
so much had already passed away—the Wiggles, Pat the
Bunny, the make-believe games we used to play. One day
—and that day wasn’t too far away—I’d think back on
Eleanor’s babyhood with longing. This moment of
preemptive nostalgia was intense and bittersweet; from
that moment of illumination, I’ve had a heightened
awareness of the inevitability of loss and death that has
never left me.
I made a note of this moment in my one-sentence journal,
and now I can hang on to it forever. “All packed up to go
home—waiting for the ferry—Eleanor had as much fun
climbing the beach stairs as anything we did all summer: up
and down, up and down. Heartbreakingly adorable in her
white hat that Jamie bought. Clutching her favorite
toothbrush of course. But everything changes, everything
passes.” (Sometimes I do cheat and write more than one
sentence.)
When I introduced the idea of the one-sentence journal
on my blog, I was surprised by the enthusiastic response.

Clearly, a lot of people suffer from the same thwarted
journal-keeping impulse that I do; like me, they find the
prospect of “keeping a journal” enticing but intimidating.
The idea of keeping a limited journal, to enjoy the
satisfaction of keeping a record of experiences or thoughts
but without the guilt or burden of writing at length, struck a
chord.
Several people shared their own versions of a onesentence journal. One reader kept a journal that he planned
to give to his three children; he travels a lot for work, so he
keeps a small notebook in his briefcase, and every time he
gets on a plane—and only while passengers are boarding
—he fills a few pages about the latest goings-on in their
family. I think this is a particularly brilliant solution because it
transforms wasted time (boarding time) into an enjoyable,
creative, and productive period. Another reader wrote to
say that, after seeing an interview with the writer Elizabeth
Gilbert on Oprah, she’d been inspired to imitate Gilbert’s
practice of keeping a happiness journal in which she writes
down the happiest moment of every day. Another reader,
an entrepreneur, keeps a work journal, in which he notes
any important work-related events, problems, or
discoveries. He reported that it was an invaluable resource,
because whenever he wants to remember how he handled
a particular situation, his journal prompts his memory of
how he handled it and what he learned: “I work alone, and if
I didn’t have a work journal, I’d probably keep making the
same stupid mistakes over and over. Also it gives me a
feeling of progress by reminding me how far I’ve come

since I started my company.”
Along with keeping the one-sentence journal, the
catastrophe memoirs spurred me to take another, less
pleasant kind of action. I realized that Jamie and I needed
to get our affairs in order. All the memoirs emphasized how
horrible it was to deal with cold logistics at a time of shock
and grief.
“You know,” I said to Jamie, “we really need to update our
wills.”
“Okay, let’s do it,” he answered.
“We’ve been saying that we should for years, and we
really need to.”
“Okay.”
“We’re never going to feel like doing it, so we just have to
decide to do it.”
“Yes, you’re right!” he said. “I’m agreeing with you. Let’s
get something on the calendar.”
And we did. Zoikes, there’s nothing like seeing the words
LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT in lawyerly, old-fashioned
typewriter-style Courier font to act as a memento mori. And
although it sounds supremely unromantic, rarely have I felt
such love for Jamie as I did in that lawyer’s office. I was so
grateful for the fact that he was alive and strong and that the
wills seemed like play documents that would never matter.
With our wedding anniversary approaching on
September 4, it occurred to me that a (slightly grim) way to
mark the occasion would be to use our anniversary as an
annual prompt to review our situation. Were our wills up-todate? Did Jamie and I both have access to the financial

information that the other person routinely handled? I knew
offhand that Jamie had no idea where I kept our tax or
insurance information or the girls’ birth certificates. I should
probably mention that to him. Repeating this “Be Prepared
Day” review annually on our anniversary would keep it from
seeming morbid—instead, it would be an ordinary
expression of family responsibility.
Along the same lines, one night, as I lay reading in bed
after Jamie had fallen asleep, I finished Joan Didion’s The
Year of Magical Thinking, about the first year after her
husband’s death. As I closed the book, I was overwhelmed
with thankfulness at the fact that Jamie, snoozing gently
beside me, was safe for now. Why did I get so irritated
when he waited for me to change Eleanor’s diaper? Why
did I keep complaining about his failure to return my emails? Let it go!
I felt a bit guilty about my reaction to these memoirs of
catastrophe. Was it wrong to feel reassured by reading
about these sorrowful events? Viewed one way, there was
a ghoulish quality to this downward comparison—a
schadenfreude-ish exploitation, however benign, of other
people’s anguish. But the feeling of happy relief that came
from recognizing my good fortune (for the moment) was
something most of these writers had sought to create. Over
and over, they emphasized the importance of cherishing
health and appreciating ordinary life. (Other themes: keep
up with your doctor’s appointments, don’t ignore big
changes in your body, make sure you have health

insurance.)
That said, I don’t think these memoirs would cheer me if
I’d had more brushes with serious illness; I don’t think I’d be
able to stand reading them. Jamie, for one, would never
read these books. He’s had too many unpleasant
experiences in hospitals to want to visit voluntarily, even
through the lives of other people.
KEEP A GRATITUDE NOTEBOOK.
Reading catastrophe memoirs made me extremely grateful
for the fact that I wasn’t experiencing a catastrophe.
Research shows that because we measure ourselves
relative to others, our happiness is influenced by whether
we compare ourselves to people who are better or worse
off. In one study, people’s sense of life satisfaction changed
dramatically depending on whether they completed
sentences starting “I’m glad I’m not…” or instead, “I wish I
was…” In the days after September 11, 2001, the emotion
people most commonly experienced—after compassion—
was gratitude.
Gratitude is important to happiness. Studies show that
consistently grateful people are happier and more satisfied
with their lives; they even feel more physically healthy and
spend more time exercising. Gratitude brings freedom from
envy, because when you’re grateful for what you have,
you’re not consumed with wanting something different or
something more. That, in turn, makes it easier to live within

your means and also to be generous to others. Gratitude
fosters forbearance—it’s harder to feel disappointed with
someone when you’re feeling grateful toward him or her.
Gratitude also connects you to the natural world, because
one of the easiest things to feel grateful for is the beauty of
nature.
But I find it hard to stay in a grateful frame of mind—I take
things for granted, I forget what other people have done for
me, I have high expectations. To cure this, following the
advice repeated by many happiness experts, I started a
gratitude notebook. Each day, I noted three things for which
I was grateful. Usually I logged my gratitude entries at the
same time that I made my daily notes in my one-sentence
journal. (These various tasks were making me happier, but
they were also keeping me busier.)
After keeping the notebook for a week, I noticed
something: I never thought to mention some of the most
important bases of my happiness. I took for granted that I
lived in a stable, democratic society; that I could always
count on my parents’ love, support, and general lack of
craziness; the fact that I loved my work; the health of my
children; the convenience of living right around the corner
from my in-laws—not to mention the fact that I loved living
right around the corner from my in-laws, a situation that
many people might consider undesirable. I loved living in an
apartment instead of a house: no yard work, no shoveling
snow, no going outside to get the newspaper in the
morning, no carrying out the trash. I was grateful that I would
never again have to study for an exam or a standardized

test. I tried to push myself to appreciate better the
fundamental elements of my life, as well as the problems
that I didn’t have.
For example, one morning after Jamie had one of his
regular appointments with his liver doctor, he still hadn’t
called me by lunchtime. Finally I called him. “So what did
the doctor say?”
“No change,” he said absentmindedly.
“What does that mean, ‘No change’?”
“Well, nothing has changed.”
Usually I wouldn’t have given this report much thought, but
pondering gratitude and reading catastrophe memoirs
made me realize—what a happy day. No news is fantastic
news. It got a starred entry in my gratitude notebook. I was
mindful of being grateful, too, for all the bad fortune that had
narrowly passed me by: the near miss on a bridge on an icy
road, the time Eliza dreamily walked out into busy traffic
before I could stop her.
Blog readers recounted their experiences with their own
versions of a happiness notebook:

I started a journal of my own a few months ago, in the form
of a private blog on my own computer. I’ve spent a lot of
time writing in it the things that have bothered me, or things
in my life that I feel I have botched, but far less time writing
down what I have to be grateful for.
From my experience, a gratitude journal is a great thing

—and it doesn’t really need to be a written journal. I tried a
written journal for a couple of weeks, but it always felt
artificial. Now, every day as part of my evening meditation I
take some time to really become conscious of the things I
am grateful for—and I intensify the emotion. Switching from
writing down what I am grateful for to feeling gratefulness
with my heart is a great thing. I learned a lot of that in
Thailand, where many people have the habit of visiting
temples and making merit. The first couple of times I went
with them, I always asked them what to do and how to
behave, and they answered you shall just pray with your
heart, make gratitude for everything you experience a real
heartfelt emotion. And this really made a big difference for
me, from “a fake make-up gratitude” to a real, enriching
experience.
I went through a terrible period when everything, and I
mean everything, in my life went wrong. I had no selfesteem, no confidence in myself. So I started keeping a
gratitude journal of things that I was grateful for about
MYSELF. I was grateful that I had the discipline to keep
exercising, even when I didn’t feel like it. I was grateful that
I’d given up smoking two years ago. I was grateful that I
managed to organize a birthday party for my father. Maybe
this makes me sound conceited, but keeping that journal
helped me not be paralyzed by self-loathing.
But after two weeks of keeping a gratitude notebook, I

realized that although gratitude boosts happiness, my
gratitude notebook wasn’t having that effect anymore. It had
started to feel forced and affected, and instead of putting
me in a grateful frame of mind, it made me annoyed. Later,
I read a study that suggested I might have had better luck
with my gratitude notebook if I had kept it twice a week
instead of every day; expressing gratitude less often
seemed to keep it more meaningful. But by then I’d soured
on the task. I gave it up.
Because my gratitude notebook didn’t work, I had to find
other ways to cultivate gratitude. I tied the action of typing
my password into my computer to a moment of gratitude;
while I waited for my computer to wake up from its slumber,
I thought grateful thoughts. This gratitude meditation had the
same effect as a gratitude notebook, but somehow it didn’t
bug me. (Speaking of “gratitude meditation,” I noticed that if
I put the word “meditation” after any activity, it suddenly
seemed much more high-minded and spiritual: when
waiting for the bus, I’d tell myself I was doing “bus-waiting
meditation” in the slow line at the drugstore, I was doing
“waiting-in-line meditation.”) I worked harder to appreciate
my ordinary day. This thought arose most naturally when I
put the girls to bed. I give Eleanor her sippy cup of milk,
then cuddle her in my lap as I rock her to sleep. With Eliza,
after Jamie has read to her from Harry Potter for half an
hour, I go snuggle with her for fifteen minutes or so. We lie
together on her bed, her head on my shoulder, and talk. I
tried to appreciate the seasons more, too—to notice, in the
midst of concrete and cabs, the color of the sky, the quality

of light, the flowers in window boxes. “There is, indeed,”
wrote Samuel Johnson, “something inexpressibly pleasing
in the annual renovation of the world, and the new display of
the treasures of nature.”
When I was feeling a distinct lack of gratitude, I tried to
cure it by applying my Third Commandment to “Act the way
I want to feel.” Could I turn complaints into thankfulness?
When I felt annoyed at having to take Eleanor for her
pediatrician’s checkup, I told myself, “I feel grateful for
taking Eleanor to the doctor.” The crazy thing is—it worked!
How disappointed I’d be if someone else took her. One
sleepless morning, I was wide awake at 3:00 A.M., and at
4:00, instead of continuing to toss and fume, I told myself, “I
feel grateful for being awake at 4:00.” I got up, made myself
some tea, and headed to my dark, quiet office. I lit my
orange-blossom-scented candle and settled in—knowing
that I’d have no interruptions for at least two hours. Instead
of starting my day feeling frustrated or groggy, I started my
day with a feeling of tranquility and accomplishment. Voilà!
A complaint turned into thankfulness.
I’d been spending a lot of time thinking about trying to be
more grateful. Then one hot Sunday afternoon, when we
were at the pool with Jamie’s parents, Eliza said to me,
“You know what I was just thinking? ‘I’m in the pool, it’s
summer, I’m seven years old, I’m wearing a very cute
bathing suit, and my grandmother is asking me if I want
anything to eat or drink.’” By which she meant: Life doesn’t
get better than this.
“I know exactly what you mean,” I replied.

IMITATE A SPIRITUAL MASTER.
One of the most universal spiritual practices is the imitation
of a spiritual master as a way to gain understanding and
discipline. Christians, for example, study Thomas à
Kempis’s Imitation of Christ and ask, “What would Jesus
do?” In the secular world, I believe, people often read
biographies for spiritual reasons: they want to study and
learn from the example of great lives, whether those of
Winston Churchill, Abraham Lincoln, Oprah Winfrey, or
Warren Buffett. That desire had certainly been one of the
reasons why I’d wanted to write biographies myself. Now I
decided to study and imitate a new spiritual master—but
whom? I asked blog readers what spiritual masters they
followed.

I greatly admire & have learned a lot from 2 Zen teachers
(although that’s not a tradition I practice). Norman Fischer
is a person of wisdom, patience & common sense. My
favorite Jewish Zen grandmother (not mine), a woman of
great wisdom, eloquence and candor, is Sylvia Boorstein.
And lastly, from my own tradition, Rabbi Charles Kroloff.
Vincent Van Gogh. I know, I know, how could someone
whose legacy involves cutting off his ear be a spiritual
mentor? (Well, first of all, he didn’t really cut off his ear…)

All you have to do is read his collected letters, DEAR
THEO, to see how spiritual Van Gogh was, and also, to
gain inspiration from the life, thoughts, ideas, philosophies,
and perseverance of this incredibly talented man, both in
the art of painting, and also in the art of transcendence,
self-empowerment, and self-belief.
Charles Darwin. Fantastically dedicated to finding out
why the natural world looked the way it does; he didn’t
teach, he showed. His insights were down to long deep
thought and lots and lots of hard work. There are several
very good biographies that tell of his unexceptional
childhood, his voyage on the Beagle, and how he
deliberately chose to earn scientific respectability before
he published his world-shaking ideas, backed by huge
amounts of examples. It turns out that he was a fairly nice
gentle man too. Anyone that looks that clearly at the world
merits profound respect.
Anne Lamott because she is so honest and Rabbi
Wayne Dosick even though I’m not Jewish.
Two that come to mind: Dr. Andrew Weil, an integrative
medicine practitioner and author of many books on the
subject. He discusses how people can feel better mentally,
physically, and spiritually and his advice always resonates
with me. Another is Natalie Goldberg, author of the popular
writing book, Writing Down the Bones. It’s a zen approach

to writing, but as she points out, her advice can really apply
to many things. To me, what’s central to her ideas is selfforgiveness.
Actually, I would name the natural world as a spiritual
teacher (I don’t like the term “master”). Western culture
assumes that only a human can teach spirituality, but in
Indigenous worldview, any creature, any natural element
can be a teacher. We can learn a lot if we learn to listen to
and observe the natural world.
Viktor Frankl.
I’m not sure I’ve found a spiritual master, though the
poetry and passion of Saint Paul have captivated me. My
husband finds inspiration in the life of George Orwell.
The Dalai Lama. Just seeing a photo of him makes me
happy. I never considered imitating him, though. Food for
thought.
I’ve picked one and plan to learn more about his
fascinating life. He’s none other than one of our founding
fathers—Ben Franklin. I just read the Wikipedia on him and
it states—“A noted polymath, Franklin was a leading author
and printer, satirist, political theorist, politician, scientist,
inventor, civic activist, statesman and diplomat.” I do
remember reading that he did all these things but to this

day I still can’t figure out how. I have to do more research
here.
Lama Norlha Rinpoche (www.kagyu.com if you’re curious
to know about him. Tibetan Buddhist like the Dalai Lama!).
He’s been my meditation teacher for over 25 years. The
way he teaches is, in a way, the opposite of emulation,
though he is very inspiring himself (funny, I first wrote that as
“inspiriting”). It’s more like he’s trying to free me to be
myself, in a deep down positive way.
I know this is weird, but I’m going with Dan Savage (the
sex advice columnist). He’s not so much a spiritual master
as an ethical one. And yes, he’s a self-admitted pottymouth, but he also advocates honesty, love, and respect.
And he’s just so quotable, i.e., “it’s a relationship, not a
deposition.” As you always say, we don’t choose what we
like to do, only what we do…and I might not have chosen to
elevate Dan to that level, but it’s how I genuinely feel about
him.
Henry David Thoreau sprang immediately to mind. Also,
Nature. This quote from Saint Bernard says it well: “You will
find something more in woods than in books. Trees and
stones will teach you that which you can never learn from
masters.” Perhaps I should research Saint Bernard…
Hermann Hesse. While I never thought about him as a

spiritual guide I suppose he is, as I have a collection of all
his books, memoirs and poetry. A quote from him I think
you’d find interesting is “Happiness is a how; not a what. A
talent, not an object.”
Mother Teresa and Gloria Steinem!
St Francis of Assisi has taught me so much about
accepting things that might appear as my enemy. Instead of
hating, I can reframe a situation. For example, instead of
hating mosquitoes, I remind myself how they feed the birds
and they too have a purpose. I still dislike them, but I don’t
hate them like I used to. I love many things about St Francis
and try to emulate him.
I work with people who—among other things—are
seeking happiness. However, rather than encouraging
them to model themselves on someone—a spiritual
someone—I ask them to consider several persons of their
own gender whom they admire. It could be a figure from
history, literature, the cinema, or someone they personally
know, a figure from politics, a mentor, a family member, a
celebrity. It really makes no difference who it is, as long as
these two or three persons are individuals that they admire.
Once they have named those people, I ask them to
identify specifically those characteristics that they admire
(not their looks, please!).
Then I tell them this (very Jungian, but very useful to

know): whatever it is that they admire in these individuals
(and generally the characteristics tend to coincide for all the
people they have mentioned) is something that is nascent
in themselves, but that they have not yet brought into being.
That—the fact that it is still in the nascent and
unrecognized stage in themselves—is the real reason why
they admire it in the others. Once they have begun to bring
these characteristics forth in themselves, they will begin to
admire something different in others, in order to continue
the cycle of growth into inner freedom and happiness.
Knowing what you admire in others is a wonderful mirror
into your deepest, as yet unborn, self.
These suggestions were intriguing, and I was reading
stacks of books about various figures, but I didn’t feel a
particular affinity for anyone until I came across Saint
Thérèse of Lisieux. I’d become interested in Saint Thérèse
after I saw her praised in Thomas Merton’s memoir The
Seven Storey Mountain. I’d been so surprised to see the
cranky, monkish Merton write reverently about the sappily
named “Little Flower” that I was curious to read her spiritual
memoir, Story of a Soul. That book fascinated me so much
that, without quite realizing it, I developed a mini-obsession
with Saint Thérèse. I bought one book about her, and then
another, and then another. I reread Story of a Soul several
times.
One day, as he saw me trying to cram my latest Saint
Thérèse biography onto the shelf (between The Hidden

Face of St. Thérèse and Two Portraits of St. Thérèse ),
Jamie asked with a note of disbelief in his voice, “How
many books about Saint Thérèse are you going to buy?”
There are few topics that would interest Jamie less than the
life of a Catholic saint.
I looked with surprise at the shelf and counted the
biographies, histories, and analyses of Saint Thérèse. I’d
bought seventeen, and I’d read every single one. I also had
a videotape and a used book that was nothing but Saint
Thérèse photographs—for which I’d paid $75 (“Indulge in a
modest splurge”). Light dawned. I had a spiritual master.
Saint Thérèse was my spiritual master. But why was I
attracted to this Catholic saint, a French woman who had
died at the age of twenty-four after having spent nine years
cloistered with some twenty nuns—Saint Thérèse, the
“Little Flower,” known for her “Little Way”?
After I thought about it for five seconds, it became
perfectly obvious.
I’d started my happiness project to test my hypothesis
that I could become happier by making small changes in
my ordinary day. I didn’t want to reject the natural order of
my life—by moving to Walden Pond or Antarctica, say, or
taking a sabbatical from my husband. I wasn’t going to give
up toilet paper or shopping or experiment with
hallucinogens. I’d already switched careers. Surely, I’d
hoped, I could change my life without changing my life, by
finding more happiness in my own kitchen.
Everyone’s happiness project is different. Some people

might feel the urge to make a radical transformation. I was
vicariously exhilarated by these dramatic adventures, but I
knew they weren’t the path to happiness for me. I wanted to
take little steps to be happier as I lived my ordinary life, and
that was very much in the spirit of Saint Thérèse.
Thérèse Martin was born in Alençon, France, in 1873.
Before her parents’ marriage, her father had tried to
become a monk and her mother a nun, but both had been
rejected by religious orders; her five sisters who survived
childhood all became nuns, and Thérèse became a saint.
Thérèse tried to enter a Carmelite convent at Lisieux at age
fifteen (two of her sisters were already there), but the
bishop wouldn’t permit it because she was too young. She
traveled to Rome to ask Pope Leo XIII’s permission
personally, but the pope stood by the bishop’s decision.
Then the bishop changed his mind. When Thérèse was in
the convent, her “Mother” was her older sister Pauline, who
instructed Thérèse to write the story of her childhood, which
became the basis of Story of a Soul. In 1897, at the age of
twenty-four, Thérèse died an agonizing death from
tuberculosis.
While she lived, no one outside her family and convent
had heard of Thérèse. After she died, an edited version of
her memoir was sent to Carmelite convents and Church
officials as an obituary notice. Just two thousand copies
were printed initially, but the popularity of this “Springtime
Story of a Little White Flower,” as she’d characteristically
titled it, spread with astonishing rapidity; just two years after
her death, her grave had to be placed under guard to

protect it from pilgrims seeking relics. (It’s hard to
understand how such a short, modest account of childhood
and youth could have such spiritual power—yet of course I
feel it myself.)
Accordingly, in a suspension of the ordinary
requirements, Thérèse got a fast-track canonization in
1925 and became “Saint Thérèse” just twenty-eight years
after her death. To mark the centenary of her death, in 1997
Pope John Paul II made her a Doctor of the Church, the
elite category of thirty-three supersaints that includes Saint
Augustine and Saint Thomas Aquinas.
To me, the fascinating aspect of her story was Thérèse’s
achievement of sainthood through the perfection of small,
ordinary acts. That was her “Little Way”—holiness achieved
in a little way by little souls rather than by great deeds
performed by great souls. “Love proves itself by deeds, so
how am I to show my love? Great deeds are forbidden me.
The only way I can prove my love is by…every little
sacrifice, every glance and word, and the doing of the least
actions for love.”
There was nothing outwardly striking about Thérèse’s life
or her death. She lived an obscure existence, much of it
without stepping foot outside her convent, and though she
was born just one year before Churchill (while she was
dying in the convent infirmary, he was fighting as part of the
Malakand Field Force in British India), she seems like a
figure from the distant, quaint past. Thérèse didn’t
overcome a dysfunctional family or monumental difficulties;
she had loving parents and a tender, indulgent upbringing

in prosperous circumstances. Although Thérèse confided in
Story of a Soul that “I want to be a warrior, a priest, an
apostle, a doctor of the Church, a martyr…I should like to
die on the battlefields in defence of the Church,” she didn’t
perform outstanding feats or undertake daring adventures;
indeed, except for her trip to petition the pope, she stayed
in her neighborhood and with her immediate family for her
whole life. She wanted to suffer and to spill her blood for
Jesus, and she did, but in a little way—not in a glorious
confrontation in war or at the stake but by dying in agony,
spitting up blood, as a pitiful tuberculosis victim.
As Pope Pius XI emphasized in the Bull of Canonization,
Thérèse achieved heroic virtue “without going beyond the
common order of things.” (Reading about Thérèse taught
me a lot about Bulls of Canonization and all the mechanics
of saint making.) I couldn’t aspire to Thérèse’s saintliness,
but I could follow her by aspiring to perfection within the
common order of my day. We expect heroic virtue to look
flashy—moving to Uganda to work with AIDS victims,
perhaps, or documenting the plight of homeless people in
Detroit. Thérèse’s example shows that ordinary life, too, is
full of opportunities for worthy, if inconspicuous, virtue.
One of my favorite examples: Thérèse intensely disliked
one of her fellow nuns, Teresa of Saint Augustine, whom
Thérèse described, without identifying her, as “a Sister who
has the faculty of displeasing me in everything, in her ways,
her words, her character.” Instead of avoiding her, Thérèse
sought out this nun at every turn and treated her “as if I
loved her best of all”—so successfully that this sister once

asked Thérèse, “Would you tell me…what attracts you so
much toward me; every time you look at me, I see your
smile?”
After Thérèse’s death, when this disagreeable nun gave
her testimony during the process of Thérèse’s beatification,
she said smugly, “At least I can say this much for myself:
during her life I made her really happy.” Teresa of Saint
Augustine never knew that she was the unlikable sister
mentioned in Story of a Soul until thirty years later, when
the chaplain, in a fit of exasperation, told her the truth. It’s a
little thing, of course, but anyone who has ever suffered
from a whiny coworker, a narcissistic roommate, or
interfering in-laws can appreciate the heavenly virtue that
befriending such a person would require.
Because of my happiness research, one of the
passages in Story of a Soul that most struck me was
Thérèse’s observation that “for the love of God and my
Sisters (so charitable toward me) I take care to appear
happy and especially to be so.” Thérèse succeeded so well
at seeming effortlessly happy, and her laughter came so
easily, that many of her fellow nuns didn’t recognize her
virtue. One sister said, “Sister Thérèse gets no merit for
practicing virtue; she has never had to struggle for it.” Near
the end of Thérèse’s life, another sister observed that
Thérèse made visitors to the infirmary laugh so much that “I
believe she will die laughing, she is so happy”—at a time
when Thérèse was in both secret spiritual torment and
excruciating physical pain.

Buddhists talk about “skillful” and “unskillful” emotions,
and this has the right connotation of effort and competence.
People assume that a person who acts happy must feel
happy, but although it’s in the very nature of happiness to
seem effortless and spontaneous, it often takes great skill.
I set out to imitate Thérèse by doing a better job of acting
happy when I knew that my happiness would make
someone else happy. I didn’t want to be fake, but I could
make an effort to be less critical. I could look for ways to be
honestly enthusiastic—about foods that weren’t necessarily
my favorite things to eat, activities that weren’t my first
choice, or movies, books, and performances with which I
could find fault. Usually I could find something to praise.
Also, I saw that I needed to make a bigger show of my
happiness. For example, when my Kennedy biography
came out, various family members asked questions that, in
retrospect, I realize were meant to elicit responses from me
such as “I’m so thrilled! It’s so exciting to see it on the
shelves! Everything is going great! I’m so happy!” But I
have a perfectionist, dissatisfied, fretful, worrying nature,
and I’m not easily thrilled. Looking back, I realize that the
loving thing to do would have been to act happy not only for
myself but also for them. I know how happy I am when one
of them is very happy. How happy I was to hear Eliza say
excitedly to my mother, as they were setting up an
elaborate tea party, “Bunny, this is so fun!” and to hear my
mother say, “Yes, it is!”
As often happened with the happiness project, it was

only once I vowed to stop criticizing and carping that I
realized the strength of my instinct to criticize and carp. But
for the love of my family and friends, so loving toward me, I
tried to appear happy and especially to be so.
A worthy model closer to home than Thérèse was my
father. Nicknamed “Smilin’ Jack Craft” by my sister’s
friends, one of his most lovable traits is that he is—or, I
should say, he acts—unflaggingly cheerful and enthusiastic,
and this makes a tremendous difference to everyone else’s
happiness. One day not too long ago, when we were
visiting Kansas City, my father came home from work and
my mother told him, “We’re having pizza for dinner.” My
father answered, “Wonderful! Wonderful! Do you want me
to go pick it up?” I knew my father well enough to know that
he’d answer that way even if he didn’t want pizza for dinner
and even if the last thing he felt like doing was heading
back out the door. This kind of unswerving enthusiasm
looks easy, but when I tried to adopt that attitude myself, I
realized how difficult it is. It is easy to be heavy: hard to be

light.
Acting happy and, even more, being happy is
challenging. Furthermore—and it took me a long time to
accept this perverse fact—many people don’t want to be
happy or at least don’t want to seem happy (and if they act
as if they’re not happy, they’re not going to feel happy). I’m
not including depressed people in this category.
Depression is a serious condition outside the
happy/unhappy continuum. Whether in response to a

particular situation, such as a job loss or the death of a
spouse, or an imbalance of chemicals in the brain, or some
other cause, depression is its own beast. But many
nondepressed people are unhappy, and some seem to
want to be that way.
Why? It turns out there are a lot of reasons.
Happiness, some people think, isn’t a worthy goal; it’s a
trivial, American preoccupation, the product of too much
money and too much television. They think that being happy
shows a lack of values, and that being unhappy is a sign of
depth.
At a party, a guy said to me, “Everyone’s too worried
about being fulfilled, they’re so self-indulgent. It’s there in
the Declaration of Independence, and people think they
should be happy. Happiness isn’t the point.”
“Well,” I said, “now that our country has achieved a
certain standard of prosperity, people set their goals on
higher things. Isn’t it admirable that people want to be
happy? If happiness isn’t the point, what is?”
“Working for goals like social justice, peace, or the
environment is more important than happiness.”
“But,” I ventured, “you think it’s important to help other
people, to work for the benefit of others, and of course it is
—but why? Why worry about children living in poverty or
malaria in Africa unless, at bottom, it’s because you want
people to be healthy, safe, and prosperous—and therefore
happy? If their happiness matters, doesn’t yours? Anyway,”
I added, “studies show that happier people are more likely
to help other people. They’re more interested in social

problems. They do more volunteer work and contribute
more to charity. Plus, as you’d expect, they’re less
preoccupied with their personal problems. So being happy
actually makes you more likely to work for the environment
or whatever.”
He laughed derisively, and I decided that the proper
happiness project response was to change the subject
rather than get in an argument. Nevertheless, he’d raised
the most serious criticism of happiness: it’s not right to be
happy when there is so much suffering in the world.
Refusing to be happy because someone else is
unhappy, though, is a bit like cleaning your plate because
babies are starving in India. Your unhappiness isn’t making
anyone else happier—in fact, quite the opposite, given the
fact that happier people are more likely to act altruistically.
That’s the circle of the Second Splendid Truth:
One of the best ways to make yourself happy is to make

other people happy.
One of the best ways to make other people happy is to
be happy yourself.
Some people associate happiness with a lack of
intellectual rigor, like the man who said to Samuel Johnson,
“You are a philosopher, Dr. Johnson. I have tried too in my
time to be a philosopher; but, I don’t know how,
cheerfulness was always breaking in.” Creativity,
authenticity, or discernment, some folks argue, is
incompatible with the bourgeois complacency of

happiness. But although somber, pessimistic people might
seem smarter, research shows that happiness and
intelligence are essentially unrelated.
Of course, it’s cooler not to be too happy. There’s a
goofiness to happiness, an innocence, a readiness to be
pleased. Zest and enthusiasm take energy, humility, and
engagement; taking refuge in irony, exercising destructive
criticism, or assuming an air of philosophical ennui is less
taxing. Also, irony and world-weariness allow people a level
of detachment from their choices: fast food, a country club
membership, a gas-guzzling SUV, reality TV. I met
someone who couldn’t stop talking about the stupidity of
celebrities and people who read celebrity gossip, but her
disdainful remarks revealed that she herself followed it very
closely. I had to bite my tongue not to quote Samuel
Johnson’s observation of Alexander Pope: “Pope’s scorn
of the Great is too often repeated to be real; no man thinks
much of that which he despises.” Ironic commentary was
her strategy both to embrace and to disavow celebrity
gossip.
Other people cultivate unhappiness as a way to control
others. They cling to unhappiness because without it they’d
forgo the special consideration that unhappiness secures:
the claim to pity and attention. I know I’ve pled unhappiness
to get points for something. For example, if Jamie asks me
to go to a business dinner with him and I honestly tell him, “I
don’t want to go, I really don’t want to go, but I will if you
want me to,” I feel as if I get more gold stars from him for
going than if I fibbed, “I’m happy to go, I’m really looking

forward to it.” If I didn’t complain, if I didn’t express my
unhappiness, Jamie might take my complaisance for
granted.
Some people exploit unhappiness for decades. “My
mother always made a big point that she’d sacrificed
completing her Ph.D. program to stay home with me and
my brother,” a friend told me. “She was frustrated and
angry, and she brought it up all the time. She used her
unhappiness to control us and my father. We all felt guilty.”
The belief that unhappiness is selfless and happiness is
selfish is misguided. It’s more selfless to act happy. It takes
energy, generosity, and discipline to be unfailingly
lighthearted, yet everyone takes the happy person for
granted. No one is careful of his feelings or tries to keep his
spirits high. He seems self-sufficient; he becomes a
cushion for others. And because happiness seems
unforced, that person usually gets no credit. Thérèse didn’t
get credit, even from her fellow nuns, for her tremendous
efforts. Because she seemed so happy, they assumed that
her behavior was effortless. I know a fortunate few people
—such as my father—who seem naturally sunny-tempered.
Now I wonder how effortless this really is.
There’s yet another group of people who have a
superstitious dread of admitting to happiness, for fear of
tempting fate. Apparently, this is practically a universal
human instinct and seen in nearly all cultures—the dread of
invoking cosmic anger by calling attention to good fortune.
This feeling haunted me as I worked on my happiness
project. By directing attention at my happiness, was I

somehow putting it at risk?
There’s the related superstition that if you anticipate
trouble and tragedy, you’ll somehow forestall it. Fear and
worry can be useful, because thinking about unpleasant
consequences can prompt prudent actions, such as
wearing a seat belt or exercising. But for many people, fear
of what might happen is a source of great unhappiness—
yet they feel there’s a propitiatory virtue in fretting. For
example, on some level, I feel guilty about not worrying
more about Jamie’s hepatitis C. I keep track of every piece
of information we get, I go to many of Jamie’s
appointments, I’ve learned a lot about hepatitis C. But when
it isn’t an active issue in our lives, I don’t think much about
it, and sometimes my detachment seems…irresponsible.
Shouldn’t I be more concerned? But my worry won’t change
the reality of Jamie’s liver. Whipping myself up into a frenzy
of fear, however, would make both Jamie and me unhappy.
(On the other hand, some believe that if you allow yourself
to be unhappy, terrible things will happen—most likely
cancer. This kind of thinking isn’t new. During the Great
Plague of London in 1665, for example, people believed
that staying cheerful would ward off infection.)
Last, some people are unhappy because they won’t take
the trouble to be happy. Happiness takes energy and
discipline. It is easy to be heavy, etc. People who are stuck
in an unhappy state are pitiable; surely they feel trapped,
with no sense of having a choice in how they feel. Although
their unhappiness is a drag on those around them—

emotional contagion, unfortunately, operates more
powerfully for negative emotions than for positive emotions
—they suffer, too.
Philosophers, scientists, saints, and charlatans all give
instruction on how to be happy, but this doesn’t matter to a
person who doesn’t want to be happy. If you don’t believe
you’re happy, you’re not. As Publilius Syrus observed, “No
man is happy who does not think himself so.” If you think
you’re happy, you are. That’s why Thérèse said, “I take care
to appear happy and especially to be so.”
One of the key underlying purposes of this month’s
resolutions and my entire happiness project was to be able
to bear up courageously when the phone rang with bad
news—as inevitably, it would.
Well, bad news did come, right at the end of the month.
My mother called. “Have you talked to Elizabeth?” she
asked.
“No, not for about a week,” I answered. “What’s up?”
“Well, she has diabetes.”

“Diabetes?”
“Yes. Type 2, they think, but they’re not sure. It’s lucky
they diagnosed her when they did—her blood sugar level
was dangerously high.”
“How did she figure it out? What happens now? Why did
she get it?” Every random thing I knew about diabetes
began zipping through my mind: the responsiveness of type
2 to changes in diet and behavior; the tensions that had

arisen in the diabetes community between advocates for
type 1 and type 2 over allocation of research money;
memories from sixth grade, when I watched my friend
injecting herself in her stomach with insulin. My mother told
me what she knew. Then I called my sister to hear her tell
the story over again.
Over the next several weeks, the news kept changing. At
first the doctors thought Elizabeth had type 2, even though
she doesn’t fit the usual profile—she’s young, thin, fit. That
diagnosis was a blow, but two things cushioned it. First,
she’d been feeling lousy, and getting her blood sugar under
control made her feel much better. Also, we were relieved
that she didn’t have type 1, which requires daily insulin and
can’t be alleviated by diet and exercise. Well—it turned out
she did have type 1.
When people are faced with serious setbacks, a
psychological mechanism kicks in to help them see
positive aspects in the situation, and I could feel myself
starting to search for opportunities for “posttraumatic
growth.” With various resolutions ringing in my ears, I tried
to keep perspective and feel gratitude. “It’s so lucky they
caught it when they did,” I told Elizabeth. “You’ll be eating
well and exercising regularly. You’ll get this under control,
you’ll get used to it, and you’ll do great.”
Elizabeth deployed the downward-comparison strategy.
“Yes,” she said. “And think about all the other things it
could have been. The diagnosis could have been so much
worse. Diabetes really is manageable.” What she didn’t
say, and I didn’t say, was that sure, it could have been a lot

worse—but it also could have been nothing at all.
After college, my roommate was in a bad car accident,
and I flew out to Hawaii to see her. She was wearing a halo
brace with bolts drilled into her skull.
“Do you feel lucky to be alive?” I asked.
“Well, actually,” she said, “I feel like I really wish I hadn’t
been in a damn car crash.”
It’s not easy to stay focused on the positive. But I think
that my resolutions did help me cope with this news. What if
I’d been the one diagnosed with diabetes? I think they
would have helped even more. A common eighteenthcentury epitaph reads:

Remember, friends, as you pass by,
As you are now so once was I.
As I am now, so you must be.
Prepare yourself to follow me.
A true happiness project sentiment. Now, I kept
reminding myself, is the time to keep my resolutions.
Because the telephone is going to ring again.

9
SEPTEMBER
Pursue a Passion

BOOKS

Write a novel.
Make time.
Forget about results.
Master a new technology.

Returning from vacation made me appreciate my beloved
library anew. This library, just one block from my apartment,
is perfect: a beautiful building, open stacks, Internet
access, a terrific children’s section, and a quiet study room
in which to do my writing—and boy, is that room quiet. I still
remember the glares I got one morning when I forgot to
mute the start-up tones on my laptop. It was easy to take
the library for granted—I’d been going there several times a
week for seven years—but my brief absence reminded me
how much I loved it (thus proving the advice of happiness
experts, who advocate periods of deprivation to sharpen
pleasures).
Given my happiness to be back at the library—and also

September’s association with the beginning of the school
year—it was appropriate that this month revolve around
books. My chief resolution for the month was to “Pursue a
passion,” which in my case meant everything related to
books. I love reading and writing, and my work centers on
reading and writing, yet these activities still get crowded out
of my time.
Long ago, I read the writer Dorothea Brande’s warning
that writers are too inclined to spend their time on wordy
occupations like reading, talking, and watching TV, movies,
and plays. Instead, she suggested, writers should recharge
themselves with language-free occupations like listening to
music, visiting museums, playing solitaire, or taking long
walks alone. That made sense to me, and I’d sporadically
tried to follow that advice. But during the period when I was
preparing for my happiness project, while browsing in a
bookstore, I had a glaringly obvious realization: for better or
worse, what I loved to do was to read, to write, and to make
books—really, if I was honest, to the exclusion of practically
any other activity.
A while back, a friend with three children mentioned to
me, “On the weekends, I like a day when we all spend at
least two hours in the morning and two hours in the
afternoon playing outside.”
“On the weekends,” I answered, “I like a day when we all
lie around reading in our pajamas until after lunch.” True—
but I felt bad about it. Why? Why did I think her inclinations
were superior? Why do I feel guilty for lying around, “just
reading”? Probably because that’s what comes most

naturally to me. I wish I were different, that I had a wider
range of interests. But I don’t. Now, though, it was time to
be more thoughtful about pursuing my passion for reading
and writing. To me, that sounded like a lot more fun than
playing outside. (Of course, until Eleanor was older,
mornings spent reading would be pure fantasy, but we’d
had them before, and we’d have them again.)
To keep this month’s resolution to “Pursue a passion,” I
first had to recognize my passion. Done. My next step was
to make time for it, to find ways to integrate my passion into
my ordinary days, and to stop measuring myself against
some irrelevant standard of efficiency. I also wanted to
learn to master some of the new technology that makes
bookmaking easy.
Not everyone shares my particular passion, of course;
instead of books, it might be college football, or community
theater, or politics, or garage sales. But whatever your
passion might be, happiness research predicts that making
time for a passion and treating it as a real priority instead
of an “extra” to be fitted in at a free moment (which many
people practically never have) will bring a tremendous
happiness boost.
One thing I learned from my blog, however, was that
some people feel overwhelmed by the question “What’s
your passion?” It seems so large and unanswerable that
they feel paralyzed. If so, a useful clue to finding a passion
to pursue, whether for work or play, is to “ Do what you do.”
What you enjoyed doing as a ten-year-old, or choose to do
on a free Saturday afternoon, is a strong indication of your

passion. (One blog reader pointed to an even more basic
indicator: “Actually very similar to advice from a physics
professor of mine, who said, ‘What do you think about when
you’re sitting on the toilet? Because that’s what you *want*
to think about.’”) “Do what you do” is helpful because it
points you to examining your behavior rather than your selfconception and therefore may be a clearer guide to your
preferences.
WRITE A NOVEL.
My most ambitious project for the month was to write a
novel. In thirty days. I’d never had the urge to run marathons
or climb mountains, but the thought of completing a novel in
a month filled me with the same kind of lust for the thrill of
exertion. I wanted to find out whether I could do it.
A while back, when I’d run into an acquaintance on the
street, she’d mentioned that she was writing a novel in a
month.
“You are?” I asked, immediately intrigued. “How?”
“I got this book, No Plot? No Problem! by Chris Baty.
You start without any preparation, you don’t edit yourself,
and by writing 1,667 words a day, you write a fiftythousand-word novel in thirty days.”
“Fifty thousand words?” I asked. “Is that long enough to
be a real novel?”
“That’s as long as The Catcher in the Rye or The Great
Gatsby.”

“Really? You know,” I said slowly, “I might try it, too.”
“He also started National Novel Writing Month. That’s in
November. Lots of people all over the country do it.”
We were standing on a street corner one block from the
Barnes & Noble at Union Square. “I’m going to buy the
book right now,” I said, making up my mind. “I really am
going to think about it.”
I bought the book, and I came up with an idea: two
people having an affair in Manhattan. I’d been reading
Laurie Colwin, Roxana Robinson, and other novelists
writing about the problems of middle marriage, and I
wanted to think about the happiness and unhappiness
consequences of a middle-marriage crisis like an affair.
Also, I thought it would be fun to try to think through the
logistics of how two people in the same social circle would
keep their affair a secret and to write about New York City.
On the first day of September, I typed HAPPINESS on
the title page and wrote my first sentence: “When she
thought about it later, Emily realized that she knew exactly
when her affair with Michael Harmon had its start: about
8:00 p.m. on the night of September 18, at a cocktail party
at Lisa and Andrew Kessel’s apartment.” And so on, for
1,667 words.
Writing the novel was a lot of work, but I had less trouble
squeezing the writing into my day than I’d expected. Of
course I had it easier than most people, since I was already
a full-time writer, but even so, I had to scrimp on time
otherwise spent reading newspaper and magazines,
meeting people for coffee, reading for fun, or generally

puttering around. My blog posts became noticeably shorter.
After the first ten days, I ran into a problem: I’d reached
the end of my plot. I hadn’t thought of much action—Emily
and Michael have lunch, they start an affair, they end their
affair—and I’d already written most of that story before I’d
hit even 25,000 words. Baty’s book promised that I wouldn’t
have trouble coming up with more story, and somehow I
kept going. And going. Each day, one way or another, I
managed to eke out the minimum word requirement, until
on September 30, I typed the sentence, “She’d do her
shopping at a different drugstore. THE END.” I calculated
the word count: 50,163 words. I’d finished a novel that was
long enough to be a real book—as long as some of my
favorite novels, like Flannery O’Connor’s Wise Blood and
Chuck Palahniuk’s Fight Club.
It was a huge amount of work, plunked on top of
everything else I needed to accomplish in my days. Did it
make me happy? It sure did. Writing Happiness took a lot
of time and energy, it’s true, but it gave me a substantial
boost in happiness. Tackling such a big project and
carrying it through to the end in a single month contributed
hugely to the atmosphere of growth in my life. It was thrilling
to see what I could accomplish in a short time if I put my
mind to it. Also, because I was always searching for
material that could enrich the story, the world came alive to
me in a new way. On my way home from the library one
afternoon, I saw a large crowd milling around in front of the
famous Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel. “This would
make a great scene for my novel,” I thought.

But perhaps the most acute source of happiness from
writing was the happiness of expressing a very
complicated idea—the kind of idea that takes hundreds of
pages to capture. I remember the precise moment when
the idea struck me. I’d been at a dinner party with several
couples who lived in my neighborhood. I’d seen two of my
friends engaged in an intense, surely innocent
conversation, and I’d thought, “What if they were having an
affair? How could they pull it off? What would happen?”
Always before, it had taken me years to write books that I’d
envisioned. This novel might not be very good, but I’d
completed it in one month.
As I’d seen in February with Extreme Nice, the bootcamp approach has many advantages. The brilliant Scott
McCloud suggests a similar exercise, “The 24-Hour
Comic,” in his book Making Comics: “Draw an entire 24page comic book in a single 24-hour period. No script. No
preparation…. Great shock therapy for the creatively
blocked.” The boot-camp approach also gave me a sense
of creative freedom, because I realized that when I had the
uncontrollable urge to write a novel—a little-discussed but
widespread occupational hazard that affects many writers
—I could just sit down and do it.
And, to my surprise, writing Happiness was fun. Usually
when I’m writing, I constantly question my work. With novelwriting month, I couldn’t take the time, and it was a relief to
be free from my inner critic. As one friend told me, “Face it,
your novel is probably terrible—but that’s okay!” This

project helped me to keep my March resolution to “Enjoy
the fun of failure.” After I’d written the 50,163rd word, I was
immediately itching to go back and edit it—but I resisted. I
didn’t even reread it. At some point, I will.
Writing a novel provided the “atmosphere of growth” that,
I was becoming more and more convinced, was essential
to happiness; I’d included this element in my First Splendid
Truth, but it was even more significant than I’d initially
understood. The satisfaction gained from the achievement
of a large undertaking is one of the most substantial that life
affords. When I asked blog readers if tackling a big goal
had ever brought them happiness, many people wrote to
share their own experiences:

I

took on a big commitment and surprised myself by
completing it. I joined a youtube group called the 100 day
reality challenge. I made a video blog every day for 100
days. I’d never made videos for youtube before but I had a
camera that took movies. I set up the commitment to make
me focus on something positive and share it every day.
Doing a video every day was probably easier than just
once a week just because it was a daily habit. Although the
challenge was really about something called “the law of
attraction” (which I didn’t myself manage to attract), I did
find myself happier from having fun making the videos to
making new friends though all the comments.
I decided this would be the year I would train to do a

sprint triathlon. I joined a team, worked out nearly every day
for eight weeks, and after I completed the triathlon, I signed
up to do a second one. I am typically a person who lies in
bed and reads, but I always thought it would be good to do
a tri before I turn 40 (two years away). It was terrific training,
and I’d highly recommend doing a sprint triathlon if it’s
something anyone’s ever thought about doing.
I am learning Italian in less than 7 months. I was given the
opportunity to do so, and I took it. I knew absolutely no
Italian when I began the course, and just under 7 months
from the start date, I will be fluent. I am only partway through,
and I can already have conversations with native speakers.
It’s a huge undertaking, and I have almost quit many times,
but it is wonderful and fun, too.
After coming out of depression I built my own wooden
dinghy in about six weeks. I did it both as a symbol of
victory and as part of the process. It made me very happy to
finish, and the few times I had it on the water were all
memorable experiences. In addition, owning the dinghy
made me join a sailing club, which gives me access to a
beautiful and peaceful site and brings me into contact with
interesting people. All of this increases my happiness.
I am writing a memoir. I started working part-time as a
nurse so I could focus more on the writing, and I am very
happy doing this. I would say I am about half way through

the manuscript. What galvanized me into doing this was a
life-altering illness that I went through. I spent months on
crutches not knowing if I would ever walk again. Permanent
disability was a real possibility. After you go through
something like that, through a quagmire of despair, you let
go of a lot. And you realize, experientially, that life is way
too short NOT to follow your passion. So, that’s what I do
these days.
As I’m growing up, I’m learning how important doing what
you love is to your happiness. My BIG goal is to find a way
to make money doing what I love. I’m 22 and two years into
the corporate world, but my passion is designing and
making jewelry. I’m starting small making custom jewelry for
family and friends, and I just launched an online shop at
etsy.com. I’ve loved designing jewelry for a while, but only
recently have I gotten the courage to truly chase after my
passion. Although I’m nowhere near having a viable
business, I hope to eventually! Sometimes it gets frustrating
to see that my goal is just a tiny seed right now; but having
a vision of what I want it to become keeps me motivated to
just go for it without giving up! Working hard for something
that you are passionate about is SO satisfying and adds so
much genuine happiness to life.
You might experiment with new recipes, go camping in
your fifteenth state park, plan a sixtieth birthday party, or
watch your favorite team progress to the Super Bowl. I liked

writing a novel.
MAKE TIME.
Although reading was one of my most important priorities
and certainly one of my greatest pleasures, I never really
gave it much thought. I wanted to make more time to read
—more books, with more enjoyment. To do so, I gave
myself permission to read at whim. Samuel Johnson
observed, “If we read without inclination, half the mind is
employed in fixing the attention; so there is but one half to
be employed on what we read.” Science backs this up.
When researchers tried to figure out what helped third-and
fourth-graders remember what they read, they found that
the students’ interest in a passage was far more important
than the “readability” of the passage—thirty times more
important.
So between the books I read for happiness research,
such as Jonathan Haidt’s The Happiness Hypothesis,
Anne Lamott’s Plan B, and some biographies of Tolstoy, I
threw in Lesley Lewis’s The Private Life of a Country
House 1912–1939. Along the same lines, I let myself
reread William Makepeace Thackeray’s Vanity Fair,
Charlotte Yonge’s The Heir of Redclyffe, and Laura Ingalls
Wilder whenever I had the urge, instead of steering myself
to read something new. I’ve always thought that the best
reading is rereading. I pushed myself to keep reading lists.
I asked people for recommendations (as a side benefit,

this turned out to be a relationship booster; people
responded warmly when I wrote down their suggestions).
On the advice of a fellow member of the children’s literature
book group, I subscribed to Slightly Foxed, a charming
British quarterly that publishes people’s essays about their
favorite books, and I noted suggestions from the magazine
The Week’s “The Book List” section.
But the main hurdle keeping me from reading more
wasn’t the problem of figuring out what to read but rather
having enough time to read. No matter how much time I
spent reading, I wanted more. Of course, whenever anyone
complains of not having enough time, the first suggestion is
always “Watch less TV.” Which makes sense—the average
American spends between four and five hours watching TV
each day.
“Do you think we watch too much TV?” I asked Jamie.
“We hardly watch any TV,” he said.
“Well, we do watch some. What do you think, five or six
hours a week? But we only watch what we’ve TiVo’d or
from a DVD.”
“I don’t think we should give up all TV,” he said. “TV is
great—if you’re not watching in a stupid way.”
He was right. It was fun to watch a show once the girls
were asleep. Watching TV seemed more companionable
than reading in the same room; I suppose the fact that we
were sharing the same experience made it seem cozier.
I did, however, vow to stop reading books that I didn’t
enjoy. I used to pride myself on finishing every book I

started—no longer. And just as I used to make myself finish
every book, I used to keep every book I bought, and we had
messy stacks on every surface of our house. I culled
ruthlessly, and we dropped off several heavy bags of books
at a thrift store. I also accepted my idiosyncratic reluctance
to read any book (or see any play or movie) that centers on
the theme of unjust accusation. I was never going to be able
to force myself to read Oliver Twist, Othello, To Kill a

Mockingbird, Atonement, A Passage to India, Burmese
Days, Crime and Punishment, or Arthur and George if I
could avoid it—and that was okay.
FORGET ABOUT RESULTS.
As I read, I love to take notes—often for no apparent
reason. I’m always marking up books, making odd lists,
gathering examples in strange categories, copying
passages. For some reason, I like working on some
permanent, undefined research project. I feel compelled to
make lists of foreign words that describe concepts that
English can’t convey ( flâneur, darshan, eudaimonia ,
Ruinensehnsucht, amae, nostalgie de la boue),
explanations of concepts that I find queerly charged with
significance (the Fisher King, the westerly road, Croatoan,
Eleusinian Mysteries, offering of first-fruits, the hunting of
the wren, the Corn-Spirit, sparagmos, the Lord of Misrule,
cargo cult, Greek herm, potlatch, the Golden Ratio), and
hundreds of other topics.

Note taking takes a lot of time and energy, and I used to
discourage this impulse in myself. It seemed pointless and
self-indulgent. But following this month’s resolutions and my
First Commandment to “Be Gretchen,” I allowed myself to
“Forget about results” and take notes guilt-free.
Perversely, it was only once I said to myself, “Okay,
Gretchen, take all the notes you want, it doesn’t matter
why,” that it occurred to me how useful these notes had
been. My first book, Power Money Fame Sex, grew out of
a huge body of notes. When I had a chance to write my
book Profane Waste, about the question of why people
would choose to destroy their possessions, I was able to
pack the book with startling, apt examples because I’d
been taking notes (for no discernible reason) for years.
Because note taking didn’t look like “real work” to me, it
didn’t register as valuable—even though it was.
One thing that makes a passion enjoyable is that you
don’t have to worry about results. You can strive for triumph,
or you can potter around, tinker, explore, without worrying
about efficiency or outcomes. Other people may wonder
why you’ve been happy to work on the same old car for
years, even though it’s still not running, but that doesn’t
matter to you. An atmosphere of growth brings great
happiness, but at the same time, happiness sometimes
also comes when you’re free from the pressure to see
much growth. That’s not surprising; often, the opposite of a
great truth is also true.

MASTER A NEW TECHNOLOGY.
To me, making books sounded like fun. As a child, I’d spent
countless hours working on my Blank Books. I’d written two
horrible novels before I became a professional writer.
Throughout my life, I’d made minibook projects as gifts for
my family and friends. When I thought about the projects
that I’d loved doing with Eliza, they all involved making
books.
For example, she and I made a book using some of her
bright, elaborate drawings. She dictated a caption for each
picture while I typed; then we cut out the captions, taped
them on the pictures, made color copies, and had the
copies spiral-bound into a book. It was a fun project to work
on, made a wonderful keepsake, supplied a
Christmas/Hanukkah gift for the grandparents, captured a
moment in Eliza’s development, and allowed me to throw
away the enormous stacks of pictures without a smidgen of
guilt. (However, I will admit that when I wrote about this
project on my blog, one reader was shocked: “I can’t
believe you actually threw out the originals of your
daughter’s drawings. I would have made the copies, as you
did, but bound the originals into a scrapbook of sorts. The
originals can NEVER be duplicated. I must confess to
actually gasping when I read this.”)
Recently I’d been intrigued to read about a selfpublishing site, Lulu.com. According to the Web site, I could
print a proper hardback book, complete with dust jacket, for
less than thirty dollars. I mentioned this to Jamie, and he

snorted, “What would anyone use that for?”
“You mean, who has book-length documents lying around
that they’d like to print in book form?” I asked.
“Right.”
“Are you kidding? Me!” I said. “If this works, I’ll print up a
dozen.” At last, something to do with all those notes I’d
been taking without a purpose. For the trial run, I made a
book out of the journal I’d kept for the first eighteen months
of Eliza’s life (another book I’d written without really noticing
it). I sat down at the computer, preparing to “put myself in
jail” to cope with my frustration and my desire to rush.
Instead, the whole process took about twenty minutes.
When my self-published book arrived a few weeks later,
it exceeded my wildest expectations. There was my baby
journal! As a real book! What next? I did a book of my
favorite quotations about the nature of biography, I did a
book of my favorite uncategorized quotations, and I
fantasized about future books. When I finished my research
on happiness, I’d print out a book of my favorite happiness
quotations; maybe I could even include photo illustrations.
I’d make a book of my blog posts. I’d print out my novel,
Happiness. I’d print up my one-sentence journal—I could
even make copies for the girls! Plus I had so many ideas
for great happiness-related books. If I couldn’t publish them
with a real publisher, I would publish them myself.
I also learned that through Shutterfly, an online photo ser
vice site, I could print a hardback photo album. Figuring out
how to do this turned out to be challenging, but eventually I
mastered it, and once I was done, I ordered a copy for us

and the grandparents, and everyone received a neat,
organized book, stuffed with photos. Although it was
expensive, I reminded myself that not only was I keeping my
resolution to “Master a new technology,” I was also keeping
my resolutions to “Make purchases that will further my
goals,” “Indulge in a modest splurge,” and “Be a treasure
house of happy memories.”
And once I got through the painful learning curve, it was
fun. The novelty and challenge of mastering the technology
—though I was maddened with frustration at times—did
give me enormous satisfaction, and it gave me a new way
to pursue my passion for books.
Of all the months so far, September’s resolutions had been
the most pleasant and easiest to maintain. This showed
me, once again, that I was happier when I accepted my own
real likes and dislikes, instead of trying to decide what I
ought to like; I was happier when I stopped squelching the
inclinations toward note taking and bookmaking that I’d had
since childhood and instead embraced them. As Michel de
Montaigne observed, “The least strained and most natural
ways of the soul are the most beautiful; the best
occupations are the least forced.”
I needed to accept my own nature—yet I needed to push
myself as well. This seemed contradictory, but in my heart, I
knew the difference between lack of interest and fear of
failure. I’d seen this in March with my blog. Although I’d
been nervous about launching a blog, I did recognize that

running a blog is the kind of thing I would like to do. In fact, I
realized, my work on my childhood Blank Books, where I
had pulled together interesting information, copied
quotations, and matched text with striking images, sounded
an awful lot like…posting to my blog. Sheesh. In fact, once I
realized that, I decided to give up working on my new Blank
Book. I’d had fun working on it since May, and I’d gotten a
nostalgic kick from resuming an activity that had given me
so much pleasure in childhood, but I’d grown tired of it. My
blog had taken its place as an outlet to record the odds and
ends I felt compelled to gather.
On the very last day of the month, I had an important
realization: my Fourth Splendid Truth. Jamie and I were
having dinner with a guy we knew slightly. He asked me
what I was working on, and after I described the happiness
project, he said, in polite disagreement, that he himself
subscribed to John Stuart Mill’s view—and he gave the
precise quotation from Mill, I was impressed—“Ask yourself
whether you are happy, and you cease to be so.”
One of the problems of thinking about happiness all the
time is that I’ve developed rather decided views. I wanted
to pound the table and yell, “No, no, NO!” Instead, I
managed to nod and say in a mild voice, “Yes, a lot of
people take that view. I can’t say that I agree.”
I could see it in the guy’s face: John Stuart Mill v.
Gretchen Rubin. Hmmm…who’s more likely to be right?
But, in my experience at least, thinking about happiness
had made me far happier than I was before I gave
happiness much consideration. Now, Mill may have been

referring to the state of “flow” identified by the researcher
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. In flow, it’s true, people are
completely absorbed, so focused on their tasks that they
forget themselves at the perfect balance of challenge and
skill. But I think that Mill meant, or people generally believe,
that thinking about your happiness makes you selfabsorbed; you’re not thinking about other people, work, or
anything other than your own satisfaction. Or perhaps Mill
meant that happiness comes as a consequence of
pursuing other goals, such as love and work, and shouldn’t
be a goal in itself.
Of course it’s not enough to sit around wanting to be
happy; you must make the effort to take steps toward
happiness by acting with more love, finding work you enjoy,
and all the rest. But for me, asking myself whether I was
happy had been a crucial step toward cultivating my
happiness more wisely through my actions. Also, only
through recognizing my happiness did I really appreciate it.
Happiness depends partly on external circumstances, and
it also depends on how you view those circumstances.
I’d thought about this question many times during the
course of the year, but finally it hit me that this was my
Fourth Splendid Truth: You’re not happy unless you think
you’re happy. Then it struck me that the Fourth Splendid
Truth has a corollary: You’re happy if you think you’re
happy.
And that means thinking about happiness, no matter
what John Stuart Mill said.

10
OCTOBER
Pay Attention

MINDFULNESS

Meditate on koans.
Examine True Rules.
Stimulate the mind in new ways.
Keep a food diary.

W hen

I told people I was working on a book about
happiness, the single most common response was “You
should spend some time studying Buddhism.” (A close
second was “So are you drinking a bottle of wine every
night?”) The Dalai Lama’s The Art of Happiness was the
book most often recommended to me.
I’d always been intrigued by Buddhism, so I was eager to
learn more about both the religion and the life of the
Buddha. But although I admired many of its teachings, I
didn’t feel much deep connection to Buddhism, which, at its
heart, urges detachment as a way to alleviate suffering.
Although there is a place for love and commitment, these
bonds are considered fetters that bind us to lives of sorrow
—which of course they do. Instead, I’m an adherent of the

Western tradition of cultivating deep passions and
profound attachments; I didn’t want to detach, I wanted to
embrace; I didn’t want to loosen, I wanted to deepen. Also,
the Western tradition emphasizes the expression and the
perfection of each unique, individual soul; not so in the
Eastern tradition.
Nevertheless, studying Buddhism made me realize the
significance of some concepts that I’d overlooked. The
most important was mindfulness—the cultivation of
conscious, nonjudgmental awareness.
I have several tendencies that run counter to mindfulness.
I constantly multitask in ways that pull me away from my
present experience. I often run on automatic pilot—arriving
home with no recollection of having gone from point A to
point B. (This sometimes terrifies me when I’m driving; I
have no recollection of watching the road.) I tend to dwell on
anxieties or hopes for the future, instead of staying fully
aware in the present moment. I often break or spill things
because I’m not paying attention. When I’m introduced to
someone in a social situation, I often forget the person’s
name as soon as I hear it. I finish eating before I’ve even
registered the taste of my food.
In September a jarring experience had reminded me of
the importance of mindfulness. After a pleasant family
weekend, spent mostly going to children’s birthday parties
(three in two days), I was walking down the hallway after
putting both girls to bed. All of a sudden, as I headed to my
desk to check my e-mails, I had the sensation that I was
zooming back into my body. It was as if I had just returned

from a two-week trip away from myself. The very hallway in
which I stood seemed unfamiliar, yet I’d been living my
ordinary life the whole time. It was very, very unnerving. If I
was just getting back home—where had I been? I needed
to do a better job of staying in the moment.
Mindfulness brings many benefits: scientists point out
that it calms the mind and elevates brain function, it gives
clarity and vividness to present experience, it may help
people break unhealthy habits, and it can soothe troubled
spirits and lift people’s moods. It reduces stress and
chronic pain. It makes people happier, less defensive, and
more engaged with others.
One highly effective way to practice mindfulness is
through meditation, which is recommended by Buddhists
as a spiritual exercise and also by happiness experts of all
sorts. Nevertheless, I just couldn’t bring myself to try
meditation. (I took yoga twice a week, but my class didn’t
emphasize the mental aspect of yoga.)
“I just can’t believe you’re not practicing meditation,” a
friend chided me. “If you’re studying happiness, you really
have to try it.” She herself was a veteran of a ten-day silent
meditation retreat. “The fact that you don’t want to try
meditation means that you need it desperately.”
“You’re probably right.” I sighed. “But I just can’t bring
myself to do it. It holds no appeal for me.”
Everyone’s happiness project is unique. I enjoyed
posting to my blog six days a week—a task that some
people wouldn’t dream of undertaking—but sit in silence for
fifteen minutes each day, as my friend urged? I couldn’t

bring myself to do that. Another friend made an eloquent
case for why I should spend more time in nature. Both
arguments left me cold. When I’d started planning my
happiness project, I told myself that I would try everything,
but I’d quickly realized that this goal was neither possible
nor desirable. Perhaps I’d try meditation in Happiness
Project II, but for now I would seek happiness in the ways
that seemed most natural to me.
There were other ways to harness the power of
mindfulness, however, apart from meditation. I was already
using my Resolutions Chart, a practice that led me to act
more mindfully through the purposeful review of my actions
and my thoughts. I filled in my chart at the end of the day, at
a quiet time when I was undistracted and alone—though,
given the nature of my personality, this period of selfexamination felt more like conversation with Jiminy Cricket
than communion with the universe. This month, I sought to
find other strategies that would help me pay attention and
stay in the moment. I also hoped to stimulate my brain to
think in new ways—to jolt myself out of automatic behavior
and to awaken sleepy parts of my mind.
MEDITATE ON KOANS.
Although I didn’t take up meditation, I did find certain
aspects of Buddhism fascinating. I was struck by the
symbolism of Buddhism, the way the Buddha was
sometimes portrayed by an empty seat, a pair of footprints,

a tree, or a pillar of fire to signify that he’d passed beyond
form. I loved the numbered lists that pop up throughout
Buddhism: the Triple Refuge; the Noble Eightfold Path; the
Four Noble Truths; the eight auspicious symbols: parasol,
golden fish, treasure vase, lotus, conch shell, endless knot,
victory banner, and dharma wheel.
The aspect that intrigued me most, however, was the
study of Zen koans (rhymes with Ben Cohen’s). A koan is a
question or a statement that can’t be understood logically.
Zen Buddhist monks meditate on koans as a way to
abandon dependence on reason in their pursuit of
enlightenment. The most famous koan is “Two hands clap
and there is a sound. What is the sound of one hand?”
Another is “If you meet the Buddha, kill him.” Or “What was
your face before your parents were born?” A koan can’t be
grasped by reason or explained in words; meditating on
koans promotes mindful thinking because it’s not possible
to comprehend their meaning with familiar, conventional
logic.
After I learned about koans, I realized that I already had
my own list of personal koans—I just hadn’t thought of them
that way. For years, in another example of seemingly
pointless note taking, I’d been keeping a list of enigmatic
lines, and in odd moments, I’d think about them. I was
surprised to see how many I’d collected. My favorites:
Robert Frost: The best way out is always through.
J. M. Barrie: We set out to be wrecked.
Saint Thérèse of Lisieux: I choose all.

Francis Bacon/Heraclitus: Dry light is ever the best.
Mark 4:25: For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he
that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he
hath.
Gertrude Stein: I like a room with a view but I like to sit with
my back turned to it.
Elias Canetti: Kant Catches Fire.
T. S. Eliot: Oh, do not ask, “What is it?”/Let us go and make
our visit.
Virginia Woolf: She always had the feeling that it was very,
very dangerous to live even one day.
These fragments haunted me. They floated through my
mind at odd times—when I was waiting on a subway
platform or staring at my computer screen—and they
seemed strangely relevant in many circumstances.
The personal koan I reflected on most often was a
Spanish proverb quoted by Samuel Johnson in Boswell’s
Life of Johnson: “He, who would bring home the wealth of
the Indies, must carry the wealth of the Indies with him.” I’d
read that line years ago, and I often found myself turning it
over in my mind. Much later, I’d discovered a reference in
Henry David Thoreau’s Journal in which he echoed
Johnson: “It is in vain to dream of a wildness distant from
ourselves…. I shall never find in the wilds of Labrador any
greater wildness than in some recess of Concord, i.e. than I
import into it.”
With time, I think I began to grasp the meaning of these
two koans, which had profound implications for a

happiness project. I was trudging up the stairs of the library
when I thought, “She who would find the happiness of the
Indies must carry the happiness of the Indies with her.” I
couldn’t look outside myself for happiness. The secret
wasn’t in the Indies or in Labrador but under my own roof; if
I wanted to find happiness, I had to carry happiness with
me.
Ruminating on my koans didn’t bring me any closer to
satori, the lasting enlightenment promised by Zen (at least
not as far as I could tell), but it did ignite my imagination.
Because koans forced me to challenge the usual,
straightforward boxes of meaning, they pushed me to think
about thinking. That in turn brought me the delicious
intellectual happiness that comes from grappling with an
expansive, difficult question.
EXAMINE TRUE RULES.
Part of the challenge of mindfulness was to keep myself
from falling into mechanical thoughts and actions. Instead of
walking through life on autopilot, I wanted to question the
assumptions I made without noticing.
My research into cognitive science led me to the concept
of heuristics. Heuristics are mental rules of thumb, the
quick, commonsense principles you apply to solve a
problem or make a decision. For example, the recognition
heuristic holds that if you’re faced with two objects and you
recognize one and don’t recognize the other, you assume

that the recognized one is of higher value. So if you’ve
heard of Munich but you haven’t heard of Minden, you
assume that Munich is the larger German city; if you’ve
heard of Rice Krispies cereal but you haven’t heard of Wild
Oats cereal, you assume that Rice Krispies is the more
popular brand.
Usually heuristics are helpful, but in some situations our
cognitive instincts mislead us. Take the availability
heuristic: people predict the likelihood of an event based
on how easily they can come up with an example. This is
often useful (is a tornado likely to hit Manhattan?), but
sometimes a person’s judgment is skewed because the
vividness of examples makes an event seem more likely
than it actually is. A friend of mine, for example, is
hypervigilant about not eating anything that might contain
raw eggs. She practically went into hysterics when she
found out that her mother-in-law had allowed her kids to eat
raw cookie batter. Why? Because her aunt got salmonella
twenty-five years ago. This same friend, by the way, never
wears a seat belt.
Although they might not fit precisely into the definition of
“heuristics,” I had my own idiosyncratic collection of
principles—which I called “True Rules”—for making
decisions and setting priorities. My father often talks about
“True Rules.” For example, when I started working after
college, he said, “Remember, it’s one of the True Rules—if
you’re willing to take the blame, people will give you
responsibility.” I’ve applied my own True Rules to help me
make decisions, mostly without quite realizing that I was

using them. They flicker through my brain so quickly that I
have to make a real effort to detect them, but I identified a
handful of rules that I frequently use:
My children are my most important priority.
Get some exercise every day.
Jamie is my top priority, in matters big or small.
“Yes” comes right away; “no” never comes.
Get some work done every day.
Whenever possible, choose vegetables.
I know as much as most people.
I’m in a hurry.
Try to attend any party or event to which I’m invited.
My parents are almost always right.
Ubiquity is the new exclusivity.
If I’m not sure whether to include some text, cut it out.
Never eat hors d’oeuvres, and never eat anything at a
children’s party.
When making a choice about what to do, choose work.
Looking at my True Rules showed me something.
Several of them were difficult to balance. How could my
kids, Jamie, and work all be top priorities? Also, I was
pretty sure that Jamie operated under the rule of “Try to
skip as many social events as possible.” That explained
certain ongoing marital debates.
Some of my True Rules were very helpful, such as one I
learned from my mother: “The things that go wrong often
make the best memories.” This is very comforting and very

true. For example, my mother put a tremendous amount of
work into planning Jamie’s and my wedding—right down to
the wedding-weekend informational letter decorated with
cows and ruby slippers to symbolize Kansas City—and our
wedding was gorgeous and perfect in every way, except for
one single, tiny detail: the misspelling of the composer
Haydn’s name as “Hayden” in the order of ser vices. And
sure enough, now I love remembering that superfluous “e.”
Somehow it reminds me of all the time my mother and I
spent together planning the wedding (she did most of the
work); the one flaw throws the loveliness of the whole
wedding into focus. I remember reading that the Shakers
deliberately introduced a mistake into the things they made,
to show that man shouldn’t aspire to the perfection of God.
Flawed can be more perfect than perfection.
On the other hand, some of my True Rules were
unhelpful. “I’m in a hurry” ran through my head dozens of
times each day—not always a constructive thought. I
worked to change that rule to “I have plenty of time for the
things that are important to me.” By questioning my True
Rules instead of applying them unthinkingly, I could make
sure I applied them only when they’d guide me to decisions
that reflected my true priorities.
Was I the only one who thought this way? When I asked
my friends if they had True Rules, they understood exactly
what I was talking about, and they had their own examples:
Always say hello.
What would my mother do?

Don’t get up in the 5:00’s or go to sleep in the 8:00’s (A.M.
or P.M.).
Down with boredom.
Change is good.
First things first (example: eat before a job interview).
Choose the bigger life.
Buy anything you want at the grocery store; cooking is
always cheaper than eating out.
Things have a way of turning out for the best.
Use it up, wear it out, make it do, or do without.
I picked up a very helpful True Rule from my sister.
Elizabeth told me, “People succeed in groups.”
As a TV writer in Los Angeles, she works in a notoriously
competitive, jealous industry. Jamie and I had coined a
phrase, “the funny feeling,” to describe the uncomfortable
mixture of competitiveness and self-doubt that we feel when
a peer scores a major success. When a friend of
Elizabeth’s cowrote the screenplay of a movie that was a
box-office hit, I asked her, “Does it give you the funny
feeling that your pal had such a huge success?”
She answered, “Well, maybe a bit, but I remind myself
that ‘ People succeed in groups.’ It’s great for him to have a
big success, and his success is also likely to help me to be
successful.”
By contrast, I have a friend who described her brother as
having a zero-sum attitude toward good fortune: if
something good happens to someone else, he feels as if
something good is less likely to happen to him. As a result,

he’s never happy for anyone else.
Now, it’s debatable whether it’s true that people succeed
in groups. I happen to think it is true—but whether or not it’s
objectively true, it’s a True Rule that makes a person much
happier. Of course, pure magnanimity would be more
admirable, but telling yourself that “People succeed in
groups” helps when you’re feeling small-minded.
Jamie has a very helpful True Rule: he says, “The first
thing isn’t the right thing.” So when a friend doesn’t get the
job he wanted or wasn’t able to buy the apartment she bid
on, Jamie says, “The first thing isn’t the right thing—wait
and see, you’ll be glad in the end that this didn’t work out.”
Again, the point isn’t whether this True Rule is factually true
(I recognize that his precept has the “Why do you always
find a lost object in the very last place you look?” kind of
logical flaw), but that it’s a way of thinking that boosts
happiness.
Gathering True Rules was a fun exercise, and it was
useful, because as I questioned my True Rules, I became
far more aware when I applied them. By mindfully deciding
how to act in line with my values instead of mindlessly
applying my rules, I was better able to make the decisions
that supported my happiness.
STIMULATE THE MIND IN NEW WAYS.
As I looked for ways to become more mindful, I realized that
using my brain in unfamiliar ways would enhance my

experience of the present moment and my awareness of
myself. I came up with several strategies.
First, I posted sticky notes around the apartment to
remind me of the frame of mind I wished to cultivate. The
note on my laptop reads, “Focused and observant.” The
bedroom note reads, “Quiet mind.” After I put a note in the
master bathroom that read, “Tender and lighthearted,”
Jamie crossed it out and wrote, “Light and flaky”—I had to
laugh. The note in my office reads, “Enthusiastic and
creative.” I also switched on the “Breezy Singer” bluebird
that I’d bought in May so that the goofy birdsong would
make me mindful of thoughts of gratitude. A blog reader
adopted a similar strategy to stay mindful.

Every day, I type passwords into programs and computers
too many times to count. I don’t save my passwords on the
computer but am a compulsive email-checker. So a
multitude of times a day, I type the same thing over and
over and over.
And one day, I realize that what I use for my password
gets ingrained in me, due to constant repetition. Like a
mantra. Let’s say my password is “tennis” (I play tennis, by
the way), and although I do not think about tennis on
purpose all the time, I eventually realized that it’s my
favourite activity, it’s what I put a lot of time and effort on, it’s
what I do most outside of work.
I later changed my passwords to a goal I’ve been
working on, or an achievement I want. They become a

constant reminder of my goals, my dreams, of what I want
to achieve. It’s basically the same idea as surrounding
yourself with reminders of your aims, your dreams. Or
repeating positive thoughts in your mind.
Next I decided to try hypnosis as a different route to
cultivate my mind. A friend is “super-suggestible,” and her
crazy stories about what she’d done under hypnosis had
piqued my interest. My first act for October was to take a
train to Old Greenwich, Connecticut, to meet Peter, my
yoga instructor’s cousin and a hypnotist.
I wasn’t sure what I thought about hypnotism. Proponents
argue that the hypnotic state, with its concentration,
boosted relaxation, and increased suggestibility, brings
heightened focus and responsiveness to instructions, so
hypnosis helps people break bad habits and imprint new
patterns on their minds. Or it might be, I speculated, that
posthypnotic change was due to the “Hawthorne effect” I’d
experienced in January (studying a behavior can lead to its
alteration) or the “placebo effect” (treatment works because
it’s expected to work). Nevertheless, whatever the particular
mechanism involved, hypnosis sounded worth a try.
As I got into Peter’s car in Old Greenwich, I realized that I
hadn’t done much research on him. It felt a bit odd to be off
in some small town in Connecticut, getting into a stranger’s
car, and being driven to his office in a small apartment in a
residential building. Fortunately for me, Peter was
legitimate.

First he led me through a series of relaxation exercises;
then we talked about the list of aims he’d asked me to
bring. I’d included goals small and large—everything from
eliminating nighttime snacking to expressing daily
gratitude. Then came the actual “hypnosis.” First Peter
asked me to imagine myself gradually becoming heavier,
tracing numbers with my eyes, visualizing my left hand
rising into the air (my hand didn’t move an inch). Then he
slowly instructed me on the behavior that I would change.
When I feel myself feeling snappish, I’ll remind myself to
lighten up. I can make my points more effectively with
humor and tenderness than with irritation.
When I feel myself getting annoyed because someone is
giving me bad ser vice—a pharmacist, a nurse, a clerk, etc.
—I’ll establish a friendly, cooperative tone. I’ll remember to
cut people slack.
As I turn to my computer or sit down to eat or walk down
the street, I’ll feel happy and grateful for my health, for loving
my work so much, for having such a great family, for having
such a comfortable life—and from this derive a feeling of
lightheartedness, enthusiasm, and tenderness.
When I’m listening to other people speak, I will listen
intently, so that I follow up their comments, laugh at their
jokes, engage deeply. No more interrupting or waiting
impatiently for my turn.
I’ll stop overusing the phrases “you know” and “like” and
slang. When I hear myself talking that way, I’ll take a deep
breath, slow down my speech, and choose my words more

carefully.
After dinner, I’ll turn out the lights in the kitchen and not
return. No snacking, no picking at one thing or another.
When I’m hungry, I will reach for fresh fruit and vegetables.
He counted backward and suggested that I’d wake up
feeling “refreshed.” The whole instruction took about twenty
minutes, and Peter had recorded it on an old-fashioned
cassette tape. “Listen to this tape each day,” he instructed.
“You should be relaxed, attentive, and not sleepy—before
bed is the worst time to do it.”
“Does it really work?” I couldn’t resist asking.
“I’ve seen extraordinary results,” he assured me.
I dug out my old Walkman and bought an extra pair of AA
batteries. I listened to the tape each day, and, as instructed,
each time I heard it, I imagined myself acting according to
the goals I’d set.
Jamie enjoyed making fun of me; he thought the entire
exercise was ridiculous. He made a lot of jokes of the
“What’s going to happen if I tell you to quack like a duck?”
variety. It was easy to laugh off his teasing, but I got a bit
discouraged. I’d hoped to find hypnosis an easy, passive
shortcut to self-improvement, but it was a struggle to
concentrate on the tape.
But I did my best, and I do think it helped. For example,
one day I felt enraged because after I had spent about five
hours putting together an online photo book on Shutterfly,
when I logged into my account to complete the finishing
touches, it was gone. All I found was “Empty Folder.” I was

ready to yell, but as I dialed customer ser vice, I heard a
soft voice in my ear: “I’ll establish a friendly, cooperative
tone.” And I did. (Of course, it helped that the file popped
back into existence before too long.) I also stopped eating
brown sugar out of the jar. Gross, but something that I did
do quite frequently. To me, the effectiveness of hypnosis
seemed less a result of hypnotic suggestibility and more a
result of mindfulness. My hypnosis tape made me more
aware of my thoughts and actions, and I was able to
change them through a sort of mental practice. But that was
fine, as long as it worked.
For my next experiment, I decided to try laughter yoga.
Founded by an Indian doctor, this combination of yoga and
laughter has spread rapidly around the world, and I kept
running into references to it as a happiness-inducing
activity. Laughter yoga combines clapping, chanting,
breathing, and stretching exercises drawn from yoga to
calm the mind and the body, and the simulated laughter
provoked by the exercises often turns into real laughter.
One joy of living in New York City is that everything is on
offer. I easily located a laughter yoga class near my
apartment and showed up one Tuesday evening in the
basement conference room of a physical therapy office.
Twelve of us were led through exercises of yoga breathing
and simulated laughter. We did the lion exercise, the ho-hoho ha-ha-ha exercise, the cry-laugh exercise, and several
others, and I could tell that many other practitioners were
really feeling a boost in mood. Two people, in particular,
collapsed in fits of real laughter. Not me. The leader was

kind and knowledgeable, the other people were pleasant,
and the exercises seemed purposeful, but all I felt was a
horrible self-consciousness.
As I’d walked into the class, I’d vowed that I’d try it at
least three times, but by the time I left, I decided that, as
much as folks praised laughter yoga and as valuable as
novelty and challenge were to happiness, and even though
an exercise in mindful laughter sounded like an excellent
idea, laughter yoga wasn’t for me.
I moved on to drawing. I hadn’t done any drawing or
painting since high school, so taking a drawing class would
awaken a part of my mind that had long lain dormant. Also,
if cultivating mindfulness meant striving to develop
nonjudgmental awareness, I suspected that drawing would
be a good challenge: it would be hard not to judge my
(nonexistent) drawing skill.
I’d read about a “Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain”
class that claimed to be able to change the way in which
people processed visual information so anyone could learn
to draw. Perfect. I figured that, as with laughter yoga, I’d be
able to find a “Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain” class
in Manhattan, and sure enough, the class was offered by
the program’s principal New York instructor, right in his own
apartment in SoHo. I “indulged in a modest splurge,”
signed up, and for five days took the subway downtown for
a day that started at 9:30 A.M. and ended at 5:30 P.M.
Novelty and challenge bring big boosts in happiness.
Unfortunately, novelty and challenge also bring exhaustion
and frustration. During the class, I felt intimidated,

defensive, and hostile—at times almost panicky with
anxiety. I felt drained each night, and my back hurt. I’m not
sure why it was so stressful, but trying to follow the
instructor’s directions, squint, measure against my upheld
thumb, and draw a straight line on a diagonal, was
physically and even emotionally taxing. One person in our
little class had a kind of breakdown and quit after three
days. Yet it was also tremendously gratifying to learn
something new—to partake of the atmosphere of growth.

I drew this self-portrait on the first day of class. Later,
when I showed it to a friend, she said, “Come on,
admit it. Didn’t you do a bad job on purpose, to make

any progress you made look more dramatic?”
Actually, nope. This was my best effort.

I drew this self-portrait on the last day of class. My
instructor helped me with all the hard parts, and it
doesn’t actually resemble me very much, but it does
look like a portrait of a person.
Drawing exercised an unaccustomed part of my brain,
but apart from that, just the fact that I was taking a class
boosted my mindfulness. Being in a different neighborhood
at an unusual time of day heightened my awareness of my

surroundings; New York City is so beautiful, so endlessly
compelling. The rhythm of the day was very different from
my typical schedule. I enjoyed meeting new people. Plus—
the class worked! I drew my hand, I drew a chair, I drew a
self-portrait that, although it didn’t look much like me, did
look like an actual person.
The drawing class was a good illustration of one of my
Secrets of Adulthood: “Happiness doesn’t always make
y o u feel happy.” Activities that contribute to long-term
happiness don’t always make me feel good in the short
term; in fact they’re sometimes downright unpleasant.
From drawing, I turned to music—another dormant part
of my mind. According to research, listening to music is
one of the quickest, simplest ways to boost mood and
energy and to induce a particular mood. Music stimulates
the parts of the brain that trigger happiness, and it can relax
the body—in fact, studies show that listening to a patient’s
choice of music during medical procedures can lower the
patient’s heart rate, blood pressure, and anxiety level.
Nevertheless, one of the things that I’ve accepted about
myself, as part of “Being Gretchen,” is that I don’t have
much appreciation for music. I wish I enjoyed music more,
but I don’t. Every once in a while, though, I fixate on a song I
really love—recently I went through an obsession with the
Red Hot Chili Peppers’ “Under the Bridge.”
The other day, while writing in a coffee shop, I overheard
a song that I love but had forgotten about: Fatboy Slim’s
“Praise You.” I went home, loaded it onto my iPod, and
listened to it that night while I was cleaning my office. This

song flooded me with tender feelings for Jamie. Yes, we
have gone through the hard times and the good! Yes, I have
to praise him like I should! This would have been a good
activity for February, the month of marriage.
I thought again about Jung playing with blocks to
recapture the passionate engagement of his boyhood.
When I was little, I used to dance around the room to my
favorite music. I was too young to read, so I asked my
mother to mark the record of The Nutcracker Suite so I’d
be able to find it. But I stopped dancing when I got older.
Maybe I should try dancing around the room again.
I didn’t want anyone walking in on me while I was doing it,
and it took a long time before I had an opportunity. I hadn’t
realized before how rare it was for me to be home alone.
Finally, one Sunday afternoon, I told Jamie I was going to
stay behind when he took the girls around the corner to visit
his parents. After the apartment was empty, I went into our
bedroom, turned off the lights, lowered the blinds, and put
my iPod into an iPod speaker base. I had to squelch
thoughts of self-criticism—that I was a bad dancer or
looked goofy.
It was fun. I did feel goofy, but I also felt energized and
exhilarated.
I started thinking more about music. I thought I’d
accepted the fact that, as part of “Being Gretchen,” I didn’t
really like music, but in fact, the truth was slightly different: I
thought I didn’t like music, but in fact, I didn’t approve of my
own taste—I wished I liked sophisticated music, like jazz or

classical or esoteric rock. Instead, my taste ran mostly to
what might play on a lite FM station. Oh, well. Be Gretchen.
Listening and dancing to music absolutely boosted my
feelings of mindfulness. I felt much more aware of music
during the day; as I worked in a diner, I really heard Abba
singing “Take a Chance on Me” over the loudspeaker. This
heightened responsiveness to my environment made me
feel more present in the moment. Instead of tuning music
out, I made music a bigger part of my experience.
KEEP A FOOD DIARY.
I also wanted to apply the principles of mindfulness in a
much less elevated context: my eating habits. Studies show
that merely being conscious of eating makes people eat
more healthfully, and one way to encourage yourself to eat
more mindfully, experts agree, is to keep a food diary.
Without a record, it’s easy to overlook what you eat without
noticing it—grabbing three Hershey’s Kisses every time
you pass a coworker’s desk throughout the day or eating
leftovers from other people’s plates as you clear the kitchen
table. In one study, dieters who kept a food diary lost twice
as much weight as dieters who didn’t bother.
I’d felt guilty for a long time about my mediocre eating
habits, and I wanted to eat more healthfully, plus I wanted to
lose a few pounds without going on a diet (hardly an
original goal—almost seven out of ten Americans say
they’re trying to eat healthfully to lose weight). Making notes

about the food I ate sounded easy enough, and I figured
that, of all my various resolutions, this would be one of the
easier ones to keep. I bought myself a little notebook.
“I keep a food diary,” a friend told me at lunch soon after,
when I mentioned my latest resolution. She showed me her
calendar, which was crammed with tiny writing detailing her
daily intake. “I update it every time I eat.”
“They say that keeping a food diary helps you eat better
and lose weight,” I said, “so I’m giving it a try.”
“It’s a great thing to do. I’ve been keeping mine for
years.”
Her recommendation reassured me that the food diary
was a good idea. My friend was thin and fit, plus she was
one of the healthiest (if also one of the most eccentric)
eaters I knew. I’d just heard her order lunch.
“I’d like the Greek salad, chopped, no dressing, no olives
or stuffed grape leaves, plus a side order of grilled chicken
and a side order of steamed broccoli.” When the food
arrived, she heaped the chicken and broccoli onto the
salad. It was a lot of food, but tasty and very healthy. I
ordered the same salad, but without the extra chicken and
broccoli. Before we dug in, we sprinkled artificial
sweetener over our salads. (She taught me this trick. It
sounds awful, but artificial sweetener makes a great
substitute for dressing. It’s like adding salt; you don’t taste
it, but it brings out the flavor of the food.)
“I refuse to go on a diet,” I told her.
“Oh, me too!” she said. “But try keeping a food diary. It’s
interesting to see what you eat over the course of a week.”

I tried it. My problem: I found it practically impossible to
remember to keep a food diary. I’ve read repeatedly that it
takes twenty-one days to form a habit, but in my
experience, that just isn’t true. Day after day, I tried, but only
rarely did I manage to remember to record everything I ate
in a day. One problem with not being very mindful, it turns
out, is that you have trouble keeping your mindfulness
records. Nevertheless, even attempting to keep a food
diary was a useful exercise. It made me more attuned to the
odds and ends I put into my mouth: a piece of bread, the
last few bites of Eleanor’s lasagna.
Most important, it forced me to confront the true
magnitude of my “fake food” habit. I’d pretended to myself
that I indulged only occasionally, but in fact I ate a ton of
fake food: pretzels, low-fat cookies or brownies, weird
candy in bite-sized portions, and other not-very-healthy
snacks. “Food that comes in crinkly packages from corner
delis,” as one friend described my weakness. I liked eating
fake food, because when I got hungry during the day, it was
more convenient to grab something fake than to sit down to
eat proper food like soup or salad. Plus, fake food was a
treat. I’d never buy a real chocolate chip cookie or a candy
bar, but I couldn’t resist the supposedly low-cal version.
Even though I knew that this kind of food was low in
nutrition and high in calories, I kept eating it, and this habit
was a daily source of guilt and self-reproach. Each time I
thought about buying some fake food, I told myself that I
shouldn’t—but then I did anyway. I’d tried and failed to give
up fake food in the past, but the food diary, incomplete as it

was, made me aware of how much fake food I was eating.
I gave up fake food cold turkey—and it felt good to give it
up. I’d thought of these snacks as treats and hadn’t realized
how much “feeling bad” they’d generated—feelings of guilt,
self-neglect, and even embarrassment. Now those feelings
were gone. Just as I’d seen in July, when I was thinking
about money, keeping a resolution to “Give something up”
can be surprisingly satisfying. Who would have thought that
self-denial could be so agreeable?
I told my sister what I’d done, and she answered, very
sensibly, “You basically eat a very healthy diet, so why give
up fake food altogether? Limit yourself to a few treats each
week.”
“Nope, can’t do it!” I told her. “I know myself too well to try
that.” When it comes to fake food, I’m like Samuel Johnson,
who remarked, “Abstinence is as easy to me as
temperance would be difficult.” In other words, I can give
something up altogether, but I can’t indulge occasionally.
It’s true, I have a very particular definition of “fake food.” I
still drink a huge amount of Diet Coke and Fresca; I still use
a ton of artificial sweetener. I also eat a fair amount of
candy, which I consider real and not fake. But no more
crinkly packages from corner delis, and that’s a real step
forward. Bananas, almonds, oatmeal, tuna sandwiches,
and salsa on pita bread are filling the gap.
My fake-food experience showed me why mindfulness
helps you break bad habits. When I became truly aware of
what I was eating, I found it much easier to change the
automatic choices I’d been making. Two or three times a

day, I’d mindlessly been picking up snacks in corner delis
—but when I was confronted with what I was doing, I wanted
to stop. And it was only after I’d kicked my fake-food habit
that I realized what a drain it had been on my happiness.
Every day I’d felt uncomfortable twinges of self-reproach,
because I knew that kind of food wasn’t healthy. Once I
stopped that habit, that relentless source of bad feeling
vanished.
The mindfulness resolutions for October had been
interesting and productive and had boosted my happiness
considerably, but more important, my increased awareness
had led me to an unrelated yet significant realization: I was
at risk of turning into a happiness bully.
I’d become much more sensitive to people being
negative, indulging in knee-jerk pessimism, or not having—
what seemed to me—the right spirit of cheerfulness and
gratitude, and I felt a strong impulse to lecture, which I didn’t
always manage to resist. Instead of following June’s
resolution to “Cut people slack,” I was becoming more
judgmental.
My desire to be a happiness evangelist made me want
to meddle. When a guy told me that he hated making small
talk and so whiled away the dull hours of a dinner party by
doing complex math problems in his head, or when a young
woman told me she was going to dental school because
she liked the hours that dentists work but that her fantasy
was one day to do something involving flowers because

flowers were her true passion, I could barely contain myself.
“No!” I wanted to tell them. “You’re making a mistake, I’ll tell
you why!” I’d become a happiness boor. In a scene right out
of a Woody Allen movie, I practically got into a fistfight with
someone about the nature of Zen. “You seem quite
attached to the theory of nonattachment!” I said snidely. I
kept interrupting, I wouldn’t shut up, I was such a crusader
for the idea of doing a happiness project that I found myself
practically shouting people down.
In particular, I kept trying to force clutter clearing onto my
friends. My clutter was mostly gone, and I craved the
vicarious thrill I got from tackling a truly messy closet.
“Listen,” Jamie warned me one night. “You mean well, but
you’re going to offend people if you keep pushing them so
hard to clear their clutter.”
“But every time I help someone clear their clutter, they’re
thrilled!” I said.
“It’s okay to suggest it, but don’t press the issue. You
want to be nice, but you might end up rubbing someone the
wrong way.”
I remembered how recently I’d walked into a friend’s
apartment and immediately offered clutter-clearing help any
time she wanted it. Even at the time, it occurred to me that
she might have found my reaction a bit rude. “Okay, you’re
right,” I admitted. “I’ll ease up on people.”
I called my sister. “Am I annoying you with all my talk
about happiness?” I asked.
“Of course not,” Elizabeth said.
“Do you think I seem happier?”

“Sure!”
“How can you tell?”
“Well…you seem much lighter, more relaxed, and you’re
not snapping as much. Not,” she added quickly, “that you
snapped a lot, but you know.”
“I’ve been trying to keep my temper. Probably the fact
that you noticed means that I was snapping more than I
realized.”
“You also seem like you’re better about finding the fun in
things.”
“Like what?”
“Like when we were talking about how to do Eliza’s hair
for my wedding. That’s the kind of thing that might have
made you tense before, but now you’re just letting her have
fun with it without worrying about it too much. Anyway, did I
tell you that you’ve inspired me to try some of your
resolutions?”
“Really? That’s great! What have you been doing?” I was
thrilled to think that my happiness project had influenced
someone else.
“For one thing, I’m trying to exercise a lot more—Pilates,
hiking, Cardio Barre. I’ve never had a hobby, so I’m trying
to think of exercise as my hobby, you know, ‘reframing.’
That way it covers fitness and also the atmosphere of
growth. Also, my dentist has been after me for years to get
my teeth fixed, so I finally ‘tackled a nagging task’ and got
Invisalign put in. I’ve been eating at home more often; it’s
healthier and cheaper. And I’ve been going away more on
the weekends—spending money in ways that will make me

happy.”
“And are these things making you happier?”
“Yes! You’re right, it really does work. I was actually kind
of surprised.”

11
NOVEMBER
Keep a Contented Heart

ATTITUDE

Laugh out loud.
Use good manners.
Give positive reviews.
Find an area of refuge.

My

happiness project year was almost over, and for
November’s resolutions, I had to make sure to cram in
everything that I hadn’t covered. Fortunately, everything I
had left to cover fit neatly into one category. Instead of
focusing on my actions, I focused on my attitude. I wanted
to cultivate a lighthearted, loving, and kind spirit. If I could
put myself into that frame of mind, it would be easier to
stick to all my other resolutions.
The British diarist Samuel Pepys reflected from time to
time on the nature of happiness. In his entry for February
23, 1662, he wrote, “This day by God’s mercy I am 29
years of age, and in very good health, and like to live and
get an estate and if I have a heart to be contented, I think I

may reckon myself as happy a man as any is in the world,
for which God be praised. So to prayers and to bed.” (This
last phrase, “and so to bed,” is Pepys’s signature sign-off,
much like Walter Cronkite’s “And that’s the way it is” or
Ryan Seacrest’s “Seacrest…out!”).
I was struck by Pepys’s inclusion of the qualifying phrase:
“and if I have a heart to be contented.” It was easy to pass
over these words without realizing their tremendous
importance. No one is happy who doesn’t think himself
happy, so without “a heart to be contented,” a person can’t
be happy. That’s the Fourth Splendid Truth.
D i d I have a heart to be contented? Well, no, not
particularly. I had a tendency to be discontented: ambitious,
dissatisfied, fretful, and tough to please. In some situations,
this served me well, because it kept me constantly striving
to improve my work and achieve my goals. In most areas of
my life, however, this critical streak wasn’t helpful. When
Jamie surprised me with a gardenia plant (my favorite
flower), I fussed because it was too big. I was deeply
annoyed when we came back from the hardware store with
the wrong-sized lightbulbs—I just couldn’t let it go.
It’s easier to complain than to laugh, easier to yell than to
joke around, easier to be demanding than to be satisfied.
Keeping “a heart to be contented,” I expected, would help
change my actions. I hit on several specific aspects of my
attitude that I wanted to change.
First, I wanted to laugh more. Laughing more would
make me happier, and it would also make the people
around me happier. I’d grown more somber over the last

several years. I suspected that I didn’t laugh, or even smile,
very much. A small child typically laughs more than four
hundred times each day, and an adult—seventeen times. I
wondered if I hit even that number most days.
Along with a more humorous attitude, I wanted to be
kinder. I’d considered kindness a respectable but bland
virtue (in the same dull class as reliability and dutifulness),
but researching Buddhism, with its emphasis on lovingkindness, had convinced me that I’d overlooked something
important. I wanted to practice loving-kindness, but it was
such a vague goal—easy to applaud but hard to apply.
What strategies would remind me to act with lovingkindness in my ordinary day?
I decided to start with the basic resolution to improve my
manners, which weren’t as good as they should have been
—not just my table manners (though those weren’t great
either) but my actions to show consideration for others.
Perhaps mere politeness wouldn’t engender lovingkindness in me, but acting politely would at least give me
the appearance of possessing that quality—and perhaps
appearance would turn into reality. I wanted to lose my New
York City edge. Whenever I go home to visit my parents, I
notice that midwesterners really are more friendly. In
Kansas City, people seem less hurried (and they are less
hurried—a study showed that New York has the country’s
fastest-walking pedestrians), clerks in stores are more
helpful and chatty, drivers give pedestrians a lot of space
on the street (in New York, they practically nudge you out of
the way with their bumpers). Instead of moving fast and

speaking curtly, I wanted to take the time to be pleasant.
Also, I wanted to stop being so critical, so judgmental
and finicky. When I was growing up, my parents placed a lot
of emphasis on being positive and enthusiastic—to the
point that my sister and I sometimes complained that they
wanted us to be “fake.” Now I’d grown to admire my
parents’ insistence on banning sarcasm and pointless
negativity; it made for a much nicer household atmosphere.
Finally, as a way to help myself stay serene and cheerful,
I resolved to discipline myself to direct my thoughts away
from subjects that made me angry or irritable.
I wondered whether working on my attitude should
occupy an entire month’s worth of resolutions, but reading
Schopenhauer (oddly enough, given that he’s so well known
for his pessimism) convinced me of the importance of a
cheerful disposition: “Whoever is merry and cheerful has
always a good reason for so being, namely the very fact
that he is so. Nothing can so completely take the place of
every other blessing as can this quality, whilst it itself cannot
be replaced by anything. A man may be young, handsome,
wealthy, and esteemed; if we wish to judge of his
happiness, we ask whether he is cheerful.” This month was
all about cheerfulness.
LAUGH OUT LOUD.
By now I had no doubt about the power of my Third
Commandment: “Act the way I want to feel.” If I want to feel

happy and lighthearted, I need to act that way—say, by
laughing out loud.
Laughter is more than just a pleasurable activity. It can
boost immunity and lower blood pressure and cortisol
levels. It increases people’s tolerance for pain. It’s a source
of social bonding, and it helps to reduce conflicts and
cushion social stress within relationships—at work, in
marriage, among strangers. When people laugh together,
they tend to talk and touch more and to make eye contact
more frequently.
I vowed to find reasons to find things funny, to laugh out
loud, and to appreciate other people’s humor. No more
polite smiling; no more rushing to tell my story before the
laughter has died after a friend’s funny story; no more
reluctance to be joshed and teased. One of life’s most
exquisite pleasures is making people laugh—even Jamie
seems more pleased with himself when I laugh out loud at
his jokes, and it’s almost heartbreaking to see Eliza and
Eleanor gaze into my face to watch me laugh.
The other morning, after Eleanor told me the same
garbled knock-knock joke for the tenth time, I saw her lower
lip start to tremble. “What’s wrong, munchkin?” I asked.
“You didn’t laugh!” she yowled.
“Tell me again,” I said. She did, and the next time, I
laughed.
Most of all, though, I wanted to laugh out loud at myself. I
took myself far too seriously. On the rare occasions that I
did manage to laugh at myself, it was very cheering.
This topic was on my mind when I was stuck in a slow-

moving line at a soup place (no more fake food for me).
Two older women at the head of the line were taking a long
time to make their selections.
“Can I try the Spicy Lentil?” asked one woman. She got
her miniature cup of soup, tasted it, and said, “Too spicy!
Ummm, can I try the Spicy Sausage?”
The clerk behind the counter moved slowly to ladle out
another miniature cup and pass it over the counter.
“This one is too spicy too!” the tasting woman exclaimed.
The clerk shrugged without saying a word, but I could
read her mind: “Lady, that’s why the soups are labeled
‘Spicy.’”
I was feeling very proud of myself for not losing my
patience at this exchange, but the muttering behind me that
suggested that others weren’t being quite so high-minded.
Just then the tasting woman turned to her friend and said,
“Oh, listen to me! I sound like someone from Curb Your
Enthusiasm. Make me stop!” She burst out laughing, and
her friend joined in. I couldn’t help laughing, and the people
behind me started laughing too. It was astounding to see
how this woman’s ability to laugh at herself transformed a
moment of irritation into a friendly moment shared by
strangers.
It was difficult, however, to devise a way to make myself
laugh more—at myself or anything else. I couldn’t figure out
a clever exercise or strategy to get myself yukking it up. I
considered watching a funny TV show each night or lining
up a series of comedy DVDs to rent, but that seemed

forced and time-consuming. I didn’t want to get stressed
out about my laugh sessions. Was I really so humorless that
I had to employ these extreme, unspontaneous measures?
In the end, I just reminded myself, “Listen and laugh.” I
slowed myself down to give people the big reaction that
they craved.
Chesterton was right, it is hard to be light. Joking around
takes discipline. It took willpower to listen to Eliza’s
endless, convoluted riddles and to laugh at the punch lines.
It took patience to give Eleanor the laugh she expected the
millionth time she popped her head out from behind a
pillow. But they were so tickled to get me laughing that their
delight was a great reward. What started out as forced
laughter often turned real.
I also made an effort to pay more attention to things I
found funny. For example, I’m very amused by the phrase
that “X is the new Y.” So, for no reason other than I found it
fun, I started a list (also keeping my resolution to “Forget
about results”):
Sleep is the new sex.
Breakfast is the new lunch.
Halloween is the new Christmas.
May is the new September.
Vulnerability is the new strength.
Monday is the new Thursday (for making plans after work).
Three is the new two (number of children).
Forties are the new thirties, and eleven is the new thirteen
(age).

Why did I find these so funny? No idea.
I had the chance to laugh at myself when a book review
mentioned the “newly popular genre” of “stunt nonfiction.”
“Look at this!” I said to Jamie, rattling the paper in his
face. “I’m part of a genre! And not just a genre but a stunt
genre. ‘Method journalism!’”
“What’s the stunt?”
“Spending a year doing something.”
“What’s wrong with that? Thoreau moved to Walden
Pond for a year—well, for two years, but same idea.”
“It makes my happiness project sound so unoriginal and
dumb,” I wailed. “Plus I’m not even the only one writing
‘stunt nonfiction’ about happiness! Unoriginal, dumb, and
superfluous.”
Then I remembered—I knew better; feeling defensive
and anxious wasn’t the way to happiness. Laugh out loud,
make fun of myself, act the way I want to feel, reframe. “Oh
well,” I said, switching suddenly to a lighthearted tone, “I’m
part of a movement without knowing it. I missed the dotcom boom, I barely know how to use an iPod, I don’t watch
Project Runway, but for once I managed to tap right into the
zeitgeist.” I forced myself to laugh, and I instantly felt better.
Jamie started laughing too; he also looked quite relieved
that he wasn’t going to have to try to jolly me out of a funk.
“Laughing out loud” went beyond mere laughter.
Responding with laughter meant that I had to give up my
pride, my defensiveness, my self-centeredness. I was
reminded of one of the climactic moments in Saint

Thérèse’s life, a moment when she decided to “Laugh out
loud.” Typical of the extraordinarily ordinary nature of
Thérèse’s saintliness, she pointed to a seemingly
unremarkable episode as a turning point in her spiritual life.
Every Christmas, she delighted in the ritual of opening the
presents left in her shoes (the French version of hanging up
stockings), but one year, when she was fourteen, she
overheard her father complaining, “Well, fortunately, this will
be the last year!” Accustomed to being babied and petted
by her family, the young Thérèse burst into tears at any
cross or critical word, and this sort of unkind comment
would ordinarily have caused her to dissolve into sobs.
Instead, as she stood on the stairs, she experienced what
she described as her “complete conversion.” She forced
back her tears, and instead of crying at her father’s
criticism, scorning his gifts, or sulking in her room, she ran
down and opened the presents joyfully. Her father laughed
along with her. Thérèse realized that the saintly response to
her father’s exasperation was to “Laugh out loud.”
USE GOOD MANNERS.
As part of my research, I’d taken the Newcastle Personality
Assessor test, which I’d found in Daniel Nettle’s book
Personality, and my results reminded me that I needed to
work harder to use good manners. This test is short—just
twelve questions—but purportedly provides an accurate
assessment of an individual’s personality using the “Big

Five” model that has emerged, in recent years, as the most
comprehensive, dependable, and useful scientific
framework. According to this five-factor model, people’s
personalities can be characterized by their scores in five
major dimensions:
1. Extroversion: response to reward
2. Neuroticism: response to threat
3. Conscientiousness: response to inhibition (selfcontrol, planning)
4. Agreeableness: regard for others
5. Openness to experience: breadth of mental
associations
I’d always thought “extroversion” was basically
“friendliness,” but according to this scheme, a high
extroversion score means that people enjoy very strong
positive reactions, so that they consistently report more joy,
desire, excitement, and enthusiasm. And although I’d often
thrown around the word “neurotic,” I hadn’t quite grasped
what it meant. Turns out that people with high neuroticism
scores have very strong negative reactions—fear, anxiety,
shame, guilt, disgust, sadness—very often directed at
themselves.
After answering the twelve questions, I totted up my
score:
Extroversion: low-medium

Neuroticism: low-medium
Conscientiousness: high
Agreeableness: low (for a woman; if I were a man I’d be
low-medium)
Openness to experience: high
The result struck me as quite accurate. As I’d
acknowledged to myself on that subway ride back in April,
when I’m in “neutral,” I’m neither particularly joyful nor
particularly melancholy; I’m low-medium. I’m very
conscientious. I was pleased to see that I scored high on
openness to experience; I wasn’t sure how I’d do there.
Most significant, I wasn’t surprised by my low
agreeableness score. I knew that about myself. When I
mentioned to some friends that I’d scored low on
agreeableness, like true friends, they all cried as one,
“Surely not! You’re very agreeable!” I suspect that my
friends, as evidenced by their loyal reaction, are more
agreeable than I.
“Nothing,” wrote Tolstoy, “can make our life, or the lives of
other people, more beautiful than perpetual kindness.”
Kindness, in everyday life, takes the form of good manners,
and one way that my low agreeableness showed itself was
in my thoughtless habits: I rushed past people on the
sidewalk, I didn’t often check to see if anyone needed my
subway seat, I wasn’t careful to say “You first,” “No, you
take it!” or “Can I help?”
In particular, to be more agreeable and kind, I needed to
use better manners as a conversationalist. I was a know-it-

all: “A really interesting feature of Angela Thirkell’s novels is
that she sets them in Barsetshire, the imaginary English
county described by Trollope.” I was a “topper”: “You think
you had a crazy morning, let me tell you about my morning.”
I was a deflater: “You liked that movie? I thought it was kind
of boring.”
So, to try to cure these tendencies, I looked for
opportunities to make comments that showed my interest in
other people’s viewpoints:
“You’re right.”
“You have a good memory.”
“Tell everyone that story about how you…”
“I hadn’t thought about that before.”
“I see your point.”
“What do you think?”
Once I started focusing on my conversational style, I
realized I had one particular characteristic that I urgently
needed to control: I was too belligerent. The minute
someone made a statement, I looked for ways to contradict
it. When someone happened to say to me, “Over the next
fifty years, it’s the relationship with China that will be most
important to the United States,” I started searching my mind
to think of counterexamples. Why? Why argue just for the
sake of disagreeing? I know very little about the subject.
Going to law school had intensified this inclination. I was
trained to argue, and I prided myself at being good at it—
but most people don’t enjoy arguing as much as law
students do.

In daily life, my argumentativeness wasn’t much of a
problem, but I’d noticed that drinking alcohol made me far
more combative than I usually was, plus it weakened my
(not very strong) instinct for good manners. Because I never
did drink much and had given up drinking twice while
pregnant, and because of my metabolism, I’d developed a
very low tolerance for alcohol. Again and again, I lay in my
bed after some social event, thinking “Was I as obnoxious
as I think?” “Why did I make my point in such a negative
way?” And Jamie usually wasn’t very reassuring about how
I’d behaved.
During this month, I was determined to get control of my
combativeness. I might not have thought to accomplish this
by quitting drinking, except that when Jamie stopped
drinking because of his hepatitis C, I’d cut back even
further on my drinking to keep him company in abstinence.
I found it such a relief to be drinking less that I decided to
give up drinking practically altogether (a decision that was
actually somewhat predictable, because, as I knew from my
February research, the fact that Jamie gave up alcohol
meant that I was five times as likely to quit drinking). Not
drinking made me much happier. I’d never particularly
enjoyed the taste of beer or wine—I can’t stand real liquor
—I’d never enjoyed the “buzz” of alcohol, and I’d much
rather spend the calories on eating rather than drinking. I
did miss the idea of drinking. That’s one thing I love about
Winston Churchill; I love his zest for champagne and cigars.
But as one of my Secrets of Adulthood says, “What’s fun for
other people may not be fun for you.” I had to accept the

fact that no matter how much other people enjoyed alcohol,
and despite the fact that I wished I enjoyed it, drinking
wasn’t fun for me. To the contrary—it was a source of bad
feeling.
Once I gave it up, mostly, I discovered another reason
that drinking had made me rude: it made me sleepy. It was
much easier to be polite and agreeable when I wasn’t in an
agony of exhaustion. As I’d noticed in earlier months, it’s
easier to feel happier and use good manners when I make
the effort to stay physically comfortable: to dress warmly
(even when people make fun of my long underwear, double
sweaters, or mugs of hot water), to snack more often (I
seem to need to eat far more frequently than most adults
do), to turn off the light as soon as I feel sleepy, and to take
pain medication as soon as I have a headache. The Duke
of Wellington advised, “Always make water when you can,”
and I followed that precept too. It was much easier to
behave pleasantly when I wasn’t shivering, scouting for a
bathroom, or on my second glass of wine.
GIVE POSITIVE REVIEWS.
I wanted to laugh more, I wanted to show more lovingkindness, and I also wanted to be more enthusiastic. I knew
that it wasn’t nice to criticize—but it was fun. Why was it so
deliciously satisfying to criticize? Being critical made me
feel more sophisticated and intelligent—and in fact, studies
show that people who are critical are often perceived to be

more discerning. In one study, for example, people judged
the writers of negative book reviews as more expert and
competent than the writers of positive reviews, even when
the content of both reviews was deemed to be of high
quality. Another study showed that people tend to think that
someone who criticizes them is smarter than they are. Also,
when a person disrupts a group’s unanimity, he or she
lessens its social power. I’ve seen people exploit this
phenomenon; when a group is cheerfully unanimous on a
topic like “The teacher is doing a great job” or “This
restaurant is terrific,” such a person takes the opposite
position to deflate the group’s mood. Being critical has its
advantages, and what’s more, it’s much easier to be hard
to please. Although enthusiasm seems easy and
undiscriminating, in fact, it’s much harder to embrace
something than to disdain it. It’s riskier.
When I examined my reactions to other people, I realized
that I do often view people who make critical remarks as
more perceptive and more discriminating. At the same
time, though, it’s hard to find pleasure in the company of
someone who finds nothing pleasing. I prefer the company
of the more enthusiastic types, who seem less judgmental,
more vital, more fun.
For example, one evening, as part of a surprise birthday
party for a close friend, we went to a Barry Manilow concert,
because my friend loves Barry Manilow. Afterward, I
reflected that it showed considerable strength of character
to be such an avowed Barry Manilow fan. After all, Barry
Manilow is…well, Barry Manilow. It would be so much safer

to mock his music, or to enjoy it in an ironic, campy way,
than to admire it wholeheartedly as she did. Enthusiasm is
a form of social courage. What’s more, people’s
assessments are very influenced by other people’s
assessments. So when my friend said, “This is terrific
music, this is a great concert,” her enthusiasm lifted me up.
I wanted to embrace this kind of zest. I steeled myself to
stop making certain kinds of unnecessarily negative
statements: “I really don’t feel like going,” “The food was too
rich,” “There’s nothing worth reading in the paper.” Instead, I
tried to look for ways to be sincerely enthusiastic.
For example, one afternoon, at Jamie’s suggestion, we
left the girls with his parents while we went to a movie.
When we came back to pick them up, my mother-in-law
asked, “How was the movie?”
Instead of following my inclination to say, “Well, not bad,” I
answered, “It was such a treat to go see a movie in the
afternoon.” That’s a response that’s much more likely to
boost happiness—not only in her but also in me.
Giving positive reviews requires humility. I have to admit,
I missed the feelings of superiority that I got from using
puncturing humor, sarcasm, ironic asides, cynical
comments, and cutting remarks. A willingness to be
pleased requires modesty and even innocence—easy to
deride as mawkish and sentimental.
For the first time, I appreciated the people I knew who
were unfailingly ready to be pleased. A prayer attributed to
Saint Augustine of Hippo includes the line “shield your
joyous ones”:

Tend your sick ones, O Lord Jesus Christ;
rest your weary ones; bless your dying ones;
soothe your suffering ones; pity your afflicted ones;
shield your joyous ones.
And all for your love’s sake.
At first, it struck me as odd that among prayers for the
“dying” and “suffering” is a prayer for the “joyous.” Why
worry about the joyous ones?
Once I started trying to give positive reviews, though, I
began to understand how much happiness I took from the
joyous ones in my life—and how much effort it must take for
them to be consistently good-tempered and positive. It is
easy to be heavy; hard to be light. We nonjoyous types
suck energy and cheer from the joyous ones; we rely on
them to buoy us with their good spirit and to cushion our
agitation and anxiety. At the same time, because of a dark
element in human nature, we’re sometimes provoked to try
to shake the enthusiastic, cheery folk out of their fog of
illusion—to make them see that the play was stupid, the
money was wasted, the meeting was pointless. Instead of
shielding their joy, we blast it. Why is this? I have no idea.
But that impulse is there.
I wrote about this prayer on my blog, and several readers
who identified themselves as “joyous ones” responded.

This entry almost made me cry—as one of the joyful ones, I
agree wholeheartedly that it can be draining too, and it
takes so little to show your appreciation.
I’m one of those people who wakes up happy every day
—not because nothing ever goes wrong in my life—
because I choose to be happy. Literally. For reasons I don’t
fully understand, people seem ticked off that I’m in a good
mood. But, they want to draw on that energy, too. It is
exhausting sometimes.
Gretchen—I am also a joyous one. I choose to be. I
choose it every day. I have recently gone through a
traumatic breakup because my boyfriend SO couldn’t stop
blasting my joy. And yet also unrelentingly drawing upon it
like a drowning person in a sea. I felt as if I was being
pulled under more every day. I had to go or I wouldn’t be
able to breathe anymore. I didn’t know anyone understood.
These comments reminded me that the joy of the joyous
ones wasn’t inexhaustible or unconquerable. I started to
make a real effort to use my good cheer to support the
joyous ones I knew.
To keep my resolution to “Give positive reviews,” I
resolved to employ the intensive approach I’d used during
the Week of Extreme Nice and the Month of Novel Writing.
Maybe a week of playing Pollyanna would help accelerate

my move toward the positive. In Eleanor Porter’s
enormously successful 1913 novel, Pollyanna, Pollyanna
plays the “glad game”: whatever happens to her, she finds
a reason to be glad about it. My own game, “Pollyanna
Week,” would be a solid week of no negative comments. I
knew I should “Act the way I want to feel,” and if I wanted to
feel enthusiastic, warm, and accepting, I wasn’t going to get
there by constantly making sniping comments.
I woke up the first morning, deep in thought about
Pollyanna Week, and by 7:00 A.M., I’d already broken it.
Practically the first thing I said to Jamie was to chide him:
“You never answer my e-mails, and you didn’t answer my email yesterday, so I couldn’t get any of those scheduling
issues settled. Do we need a babysitter for Thursday night
or not?”
The next day, I did the same thing. We were all sitting
around before school when Eleanor started pointing to her
mouth, in what we thought was a cute way, until she started
making gagging noises.
“Quick, get a towel, she’s going to throw up!” I yelled.
Eliza darted into the kitchen, but she still hadn’t emerged
when Eleanor began heaving half-digested milk all over
herself, me, and the furniture.
“Jamie, go get a towel!” He’d been sitting, mesmerized
by the sight. By the time they both rushed back from the
kitchen with dish towels, Eleanor had finished throwing up,
and she and I were wallowing in a big, yucky mess.
“Folks, that was not the fastest action we could’ve had,” I

scolded. “We could’ve saved a lot of trouble if you’d been
faster with those towels.” Why did I throw out a negative
comment? It added to the general loss of morale without
making any useful point.
One lesson that Pollyanna Week taught me was that I
could usually make my point, even if it was critical, in a
positive way. For example, I broke Pollyanna Week during
a game of “Finders, Keepers” with Eliza. The point of
Finders, Keepers is to accumulate the most tiles.
“Can I trade my baseball cap tile for your butterfly tile?”
Eliza asked after one round.
“Okay.”
We played another round.
“Can I trade my globe for your flower?”
“Okay.”
We played another round.
“Can I trade my football for your ice cream sundae?”
I’d been getting increasingly annoyed. “Eliza, it’s
tiresome when you keep trading tiles,” I told her. “Just keep
what you get, and you can trade them at the end. ‘You get
what you get, and you don’t get upset.’”
“All right,” she said cheerfully.
Only later did I realize that I could have phrased my
request without criticism: “The game is more fun when we
keep it moving fast. Can we trade at the end?”
That night I did a better job, largely because I was so
tired that I went to bed at nine. Being asleep is a great way
to avoid being critical. But when I said to Jamie, “I’m so
exhausted that I’m going to bed now,” was that a complaint

or a statement of fact? It counted as a complaint. I
should’ve found a positive way to phrase it: “Going to bed
sounds so great to me that I think I’m going to turn out the
light early.”
One big challenge of Pollyanna Week was remembering
to keep my goal uppermost in my mind. During the
activities of the day, I forgot my resolution. So, borrowing
from some of the mindfulness strategies I had tried in
October, on the third morning, I started wearing a wide
orange bracelet for the rest of Pollyanna Week, as a
constant reminder of my goal to make only positive
comments. The bracelet worked fairly well—except that
once I caught myself complaining to a friend that the
bracelet was too heavy and clunky! So much for reminding
me to make only positive comments. But I did have
moments of triumph. I didn’t complain about our loss of
Internet ser vice. I didn’t grouse when Jamie baked three
rich desserts in three nights. When Eliza accidentally ran
Eleanor’s stroller into the kitchen wall, where it made a dark
mark, I let it go without making a fuss. And when Eleanor
grabbed my lipstick off the counter, then dropped it into the
toilet, I said, “Well, it was an accident.”
During Pollyanna Week, I never did manage to go an
entire day without a negative comment, but I nevertheless
declared it a successful exercise. Though 100 percent
compliance was an impossible ambition, making the effort
jolted me into an awareness of my usual attitude. The effect
of Pollyanna Week lingered long after the week was up.

FIND AN AREA OF REFUGE.
One fact of human nature is that people have a “negativity
bias”: we react to the bad more strongly and persistently
than to the comparable good. As I’d learned in February,
within a marriage, it takes at least five good acts to repair
the damage of one critical or destructive act. With money,
the pain of losing a certain sum is greater than the pleasure
of gaining that sum. Hitting the best-seller list with Forty
Ways to Look at Winston Churchill thrilled me less than a
bad review upset me.
One consequence of the negativity bias is that when
people’s minds are unoccupied, they tend to drift to anxious
or angry thoughts. And rumination—dwelling on slights,
unpleasant encounters, and sad events—leads to bad
feelings. In fact, one reason that women are more
susceptible to depression than men may be their greater
tendency to ruminate; men are more likely to distract
themselves with an activity. Studies show that distraction is
a powerful mood-altering device, and contrary to what a lot
of people believe, persistently focusing on a bad mood
aggravates rather than palliates it.
I’d often noticed my own tendency to brood, and to
counter this effect, I invented the idea of the “area of
refuge.” Once when I was back visiting my former law
school, I noticed a sign by an elevator that declared that
area an “area of refuge.” I guess it’s where a person in a
wheelchair or with some other difficulty should go in case of

fire. The phrase stuck in my mind, and I decided that if I
found myself dwelling on bad feelings, I’d seek a mental
“area of refuge.”
As an area of refuge, I often think about Churchill’s
speeches—in particular, his eulogy for Neville
Chamberlain. Or I think about some of the funny things
Jamie has done. Years ago, when we were first married,
Jamie came into our bedroom in his boxers and
announced, “I am LORD of the DANCE!” and hopped
around with his arms straight at his sides. I still laugh every
time I think about it. A friend told me that she thinks about
her children. Another friend—not a writer—makes up short
stories in her head. When Arthur Llewelyn Davies, the
father of the boys who inspired Peter Pan, was recovering
from an operation that removed his cheekbone and part of
the roof of his mouth, he wrote a note to J. M. Barrie:
Among the things I think about
Michael going to school
Porthgwarra and S’s blue dress
Burpham garden
Kirkby view across valley…
Jack bathing
Peter answering chaff
Nicholas in the garden
George always
These phrases mean nothing to an outsider, but for him,
they were areas of refuge.

By the end of November, I’d realized that one of the most
important lessons of the happiness project is that if I keep
my resolutions and do the things that make me happier, I
end up feeling happier and acting more virtuously. Do
good, feel good; feel good, do good.
Over the course of the month, I noticed that a frequent
subject of my negative comments was Eliza’s hair. Jamie
and I thought it looked cutest when it hung right above her
shoulders, but she begged us to grow it long. “You can
grow it long only if you promise to keep it brushed nicely
and out of your face,” I threatened, repeating the words that
untold millions of parents have uttered, to no avail. She
promised, but of course, her hair constantly hung in her
face.
“Eliza, brush your hair, it’s all messy.”
“Eliza, you’ve got the dreaded middle part, part your hair
on the side.”
“Eliza, get a ponytail holder or a barrette, you need to pull
your hair back.”
“Eliza, you can’t possibly tell me you’ve already brushed
your hair.”
This criticism was no fun for her and no fun for me. I
wanted to change this pattern. So the next time I wanted to
fret about her hair, I said, “Bring me a brush,” and I started
to brush her hair—not fast and rough, as I sometimes did
when I was impatient in the morning, but gently. “I love
seeing your hair smooth and shiny,” I said. “Your hair looks

beautiful.”
Eliza looked a little surprised.
The next time I tried the same thing. “Let me brush your
hair,” I told her. “I love brushing your hair.”
She didn’t get any better about keeping her hair tidy, but
it didn’t bother me as much.

12
DECEMBER
Boot Camp Perfect

HAPPINESS

Boot Camp Perfect

For eleven months, I’d been piling on the resolutions, and
for this last month of December, I wanted to try Boot Camp
Perfect. I would follow all of my resolutions, all the time. I
would aim to see nothing but gold stars glittering on my
Resolutions Chart. This goal of perfection was daunting,
because following my resolutions took a huge amount of
mental discipline and self-control—not to mention, it took a
lot of time.
So, for the month, I tidied, I cleared, I organized, I turned
off the light. I sang in the morning, I laughed out loud, I
acknowledged people’s feelings, I left things unsaid. I
blogged, I asked for help, I pushed myself, I showed up, I
went off the path. I wrote in my one-sentence journal. I met
with my writers’ strategy group and my children’s literature
reading group. I listened to my hypnosis tape. I didn’t eat
any fake food. I bought needful things.

Of course, I also failed to do these things. As hard as I
tried during Boot Camp Perfect, I still didn’t manage to
keep all my resolutions. Resolutions! After all these months,
I was still astonished at how effectively they worked to
make me happy, whenever I did faithfully keep them. I
thought often of the 1764 journal entry of Samuel Johnson,
who, as an inveterate resolution maker and resolution
breaker, is one of the patron saints of the process:
I have now spent fifty-five years in resolving; having, from
the earliest time almost that I can remember, been forming
schemes of a better life. I have done nothing. The need of
doing, therefore, is pressing, since the time of doing is
short. O GOD, grant me to resolve aright, and to keep my
resolutions.
Did I have even one single perfect day during
December? Nope. But I kept trying. One helpful
consequence of my happiness project was that even when I
had a bad day, it was a good bad day. If I was feeling blue,
I’d run through my mood-boosting strategies: go to the gym,
get some work done, keep myself from getting too hungry,
cross a nagging task off my to-do list, connect with other
people, spend some time having fun with my family.
Sometimes nothing really worked, but the nice thing about
trying to ameliorate a bad mood by taking those kinds of
constructive steps was that even when a day was bad, it
had bright spots, and I could look back on a good bad day
with satisfaction.

One development had given me a huge shot of
encouragement: after I’d posted an offer to send people my
Resolutions Chart in case they wanted to see a model as
they formulated their own resolutions, I’d started to get emails from people describing their happiness projects.
Several people had even started their own blogs to track
them. I was gratified to think that I’d convinced some
readers to try the method and resolutions that had worked
for me.

Thank you very much for sharing your Resolutions Chart.
My husband and I are going to create a month of
resolutions. I think the exercise will be both fun and a good
bonding experience for us after an emotionally rocky few
months. We haven’t sat down to do it yet (which is yet
another symptom of how work keeps us from spending
quality time together), just talked about doing it soon, but
I’ve been thinking about simple resolutions—like Date
night, Express physical affection, Do something new
together, Listen to her/him, Play hookie from work for an
afternoon, Go for a drive (we always talk better stuck in a
car together). We just realized there are a lot of things we
take for granted, having been together for so long, and
there are so many little things that we’re realizing we have
neglected over time that would probably make us happier if
we paid attention to them now.
[The introduction to a blog:] I have been inspired recently

by The Happiness Project by Gretchen Rubin. I love her
idea of studying what makes us happy and then trying to
apply it to our own lives. Everyone’s happiness project
would be unique, but I am sure would have many things in
common. She has challenged others to have their own
“happiness project” and I am taking her up on this
challenge!
I have enlisted a friend to do this with me—I’ll call her
Jen. And I am trying to see if my husband will join in as well.
We will track our journeys together.
Part of my interest in the Happiness Project is learning
how some of the principles of happiness might also be
applied to children. I will be exploring this as well.
And most important, I know that one of the things that
makes me the happiest is to share what I learn with others.
So, it will all be posted here. It should be fun!
In the vein of being mindful and showing gratitude to
those you appreciate, I’ve been meaning to share with you
the positive effect your blog has had on my life for a while
now. You posted a few things on resolutions that inspired
me to come up with my own. Knowing that I needed to be
specific about things that could be accomplished and that
being more social would lead to additional happiness, I
wrote out the following three general goals against which I
could judge success at the end:
1. Take a Class

2. Volunteer
3. Join a Group
I promptly signed up for two courses to continue learning
for my own edification. I also volunteered with the Boy
Scout troop that I had been affiliated with while I was in my
teens. These two resolutions took up much of my free time
for the first half of the year. Recently, I began working
toward the third goal and joined a rowing club.
I can tell you, without a doubt, that these three resolutions
have led to all of my best experiences this year. I met some
important friends in my economics class, have learned how
to motivate and lead through my experiences with the Boy
Scouts, and am just starting to expand my social circle by
joining the rowing club (while getting more exercise).
Honestly, when people ask me what I’m “up to,” I tell them
about the things I’m doing because of those resolutions and
really sound interesting. More importantly, I’m feeling
fulfilled and definitely happier.
I’m now taking a third course and considering joining a
wine club. I also walk five times a week, and keep myself
motivated to maintain the habit using many of the
suggestions you’ve shared (the one that sticks with me the
most is the one from your dad about just having to put the
shoes on and get to the mailbox).
I’ve learned so much through your research and
experience and just want you to know that your work is
worth the effort. The impact on my life has been immediate,
and I’m certain it will last for many years, if not the rest of my

life. Sometimes, people say that if the things they do can
influence one person, then it was all worth it. Well, you have!
When I found your blog, a light came on and I thought that
the members of our group would love this project as we are
all indeed searching for happiness. I was right! When I
introduced the idea everyone is so excited to begin. We will
meet next Monday and share some of our Commandments
and I will then introduce your Resolutions Charts. As you
say in your blog, each project will look different, according
to the person, but as I continue to read your blog, it has
become clear to me that in the end we are all looking for
basically the same thing…Happiness!
To make your own happiness, to write your own
Commandments and check yourself with your own
resolutions is simply GENIUS! My group struggles with this
search but never had the thought of going and taking
happiness for ourselves, we simply try to live better and
hope that it comes.
Time will tell but certainly the group is very excited about
the prospect and their “homework” which was to begin their
own Commandments.
Last week-end my daughter and a friend met me at my
mom’s house. My daughter is 28 and my mom is 86—I’m
somewhere in the middle. My daughter and her friend
started talking about the happiness project and some of the
precepts they had learned there. My daughter’s friend

mentioned the idea of really enjoying what you have—such
as using the good dishes, not saving the dress for a day
that may never come, etc. My mom, who is a VERY frugal
woman, began to talk about some demitasse cups that had
been passed on to her and how they were boxed up in the
closet because she didn’t have a display case. I suggested
we go to the furniture store and find one she could use, and
surprisingly she agreed. We looked at two stores and left
with good information about a curio cabinet. On the way out
of the second store, Mom noticed a chair that looked very
comfortable, and had a heating and vibrating feature that
felt good. I ended up paying for half of the chair for her
Christmas present and we later ordered the curio as well.
We all know that happiness is not in things. However, at
age 86 I was so glad that my mom could have a couple of
things that she will really enjoy. Her chair was delivered and
she reports that she may never sit anywhere else. When the
curio cabinet is delivered we will have a great time putting
together the display of her family heirlooms. Thanks for the
inspiration!
It made me very happy to think that my blog had helped
contribute to the happiness of people I’d never even met. Of
course, that was the purpose of the blog—but I was thrilled
to discover that it was actually working.
“Your year is almost up,” friends kept saying to me. “So,
are you happier?”
“Absolutely!” I answered.

“But how do you really know?” one scientist friend asked.
“Did you do any kind of systematic measurement over the
course of the year?”
“Well, no.”
“You didn’t have Jamie score you each day or keep a
mood chart on yourself or anything like that?”
“Nope.”
“So maybe you aren’t any happier, you just think you
are.”
“Well,” I conceded, “maybe it’s my imagination…but no. I
know I’m happier.”
“How?”
“I feel happier!”
It was really true.
My First Splendid Truth says that if I want to be happier, I
need to look at my life and think about feeling good, feeling
bad, and feeling right, in an atmosphere of growth. I’d
worked on all these elements, and it had made an
enormous difference.
For me, it turned out, the most significant prong was the
feeling bad. My biggest happiness boosts had come from
eliminating the bad feelings generated by my snapping,
nagging, gossiping, being surrounded by clutter, eating
fake food, drinking, and all the rest. In particular, it made
me happier to be in better control of my sharp tongue.
Nowadays I often managed to pause and change my tone,
just a second before I started to rant, or to change my tone
in midsentence. I’d even managed to laugh while chiding

Jamie—about not dealing with the insurance forms or not
looking for his missing library book.
At the same time, I was having more feeling good—
more laughing with my family, talking about children’s
literature with my book group, listening to music I liked. I’d
learned a lot of ways to get more bang for my happiness
buck.
Feeling right had been very important to my happiness
when I was struggling with the question of whether to switch
from law to writing, but it hadn’t been the source of many of
my resolutions over the past months. At the start of
December, however, I was hit by the idea for a goal I
wanted to undertake to “feel right” in the coming year: I
wanted to get involved in the issue of organ donation. We
all hoped that Jamie would never need a liver transplant, of
course, but his hepatitis C had made me much more
interested in the issue. If I could figure out some small way,
myself, to help boost the number of organ donations in the
country, I’d feel as though I’d been able to transform an
unfortunate personal situation into some larger good. I’d
already started gathering a list of names and resources that
I wanted to check out. I didn’t particularly enjoy this work,
but I could see that this project would make me feel right.
But what had surprised me most about the First Splendid
Truth was the importance of the final prong, the
atmosphere of growth. I hadn’t ascribed much weight to it,
even when I’d identified it as the fourth element of
happiness. My happiness project had proved to me,

however, that the atmosphere of growth was a huge
contributor to happiness. Although my instinct was to shy
away from novelty and challenge, in fact they are a key
source of happiness, even for an unadventurous soul like
me. In particular, I’d seen how the atmosphere of growth
provided by my blog had become an enormous source of
happiness. My successful mastery of that skill had given me
feelings of gratification and mastery that in turn had
energized me to push myself even harder.
There was another question that people kept asking me:
“What about Jamie—has he changed, is he happier?” One
thing I knew: Jamie wouldn’t be very happy if I pestered him
to provide a comprehensive analysis of his emotional state.
Even so, one night I couldn’t resist asking him, “Do you
think my happiness project has made you happier? Do you
think you’ve changed at all?”
“Nope,” he answered.
But he had changed. Without any nagging on my part, he
was taking on tasks, such as doing holiday shopping or
putting our finances on Quicken, that he’d never done
before. He was much better about doing little chores like
answering my e-mails and emptying the diaper pail now
than he’d been a year ago. Not only did he remember my
birthday this month—he wished me “Happy Birthday” the
minute we woke up that morning—he organized a family
party, got me a present, and took photos (he never takes
photos).
He’d absorbed more of my happiness talk than I’d
realized, too. One day when we were out doing errands, I

overheard him say to Eliza, “When we get to the Container
Store, you’re going to see something very interesting.
Mommy is going to buy something for $5 that’s going to
make her extremely happy. Very little things can make a
person happy, it doesn’t matter how expensive something
is.” The item in question? A sponge holder that fastens to
the side of the sink with suction cups. I’d coveted one ever
since I spotted this device in my brother-and sister-in-law’s
apartment. And Jamie was right, I was made extremely
happy by that purchase—but he would never have made an
observation like that last year. But of all the happinessboosting things he did, my favorite was the e-mail he sent
me after I was angry that he hadn’t made a phone call that
he’d promised to make:

From: Rubin James
To: Gretchen Rubin
Subject: don’t be mad—see below

I confess that when I started the happiness project, I
feared that if I stopped nagging and complaining, Jamie
would leave all the work to me. That didn’t happen. Now,
correlation is not causation, so maybe my happiness
project had nothing to do with the ways in which he
changed—but for whatever reason, the atmosphere in our
house was happier. That’s not a very scientific standard of
measurement. Maybe I was seeing what I wanted to see.
Maybe, but who cares?
If I think I’m happier, I am happier. That’s the Fourth
Splendid Truth. The Fourth Splendid Truth may have been
the last Splendid Truth I identified, but in fact I’d understood
it on some level from that first moment on the bus, when I
had the idea for my happiness project. I’m not happy unless
I think I’m happy—and by pushing myself to be mindful of
my happiness, I can truly experience it.
Although the First Splendid Truth was extremely valuable

in showing me how to change my life to be happier, the
Second Splendid Truth was more important to my
understanding of the nature of happiness.
One of the best ways to make myself happy is to make

other people happy.
One of the best ways to make other people happy is to
be happy myself.
The Second Splendid Truth made clear to me why
working to be happy isn’t a selfish goal and why, as Robert
Louis Stevenson said, “There is no duty we so much
underrate as the duty of being happy.” When I was feeling
unhappy, I felt dispirited, lethargic, defensive, and
uninterested in other people; even worse, when I felt angry
or resentful, I searched for excuses to feel even more angry
and resentful. On the other hand, when I felt happy, I was
more likely to be lighthearted, generous, creative, kind,
encouraging, and helpful.
December was a crazy time for my sister, Elizabeth. She
and her writing partner were writing a pilot for a network TV
show (one of the most important work opportunities she’d
ever had), she and her fiancé, Adam, had just bought a
house, she was planning their wedding, and she was
dealing with her recent diagnosis of diabetes. I really
wished that I could do something for Elizabeth—then I
thought of something I could do.
I called her up. “Hey, guess what?”
“What?” she said, sounding harried.

“I’ve been feeling bad about all the stress you have right
now, so I’ve decided”—I paused for effect—“to do your
holiday shopping for you!”
“Gretch, would you really?” she said. “That would be so
great.” Elizabeth’s stress must have been as bad as I’d
thought; she didn’t even pretend to resist the offer.
“I’m happy to do it!” I told her. And I was. Hearing the
relief and happiness in her voice made me very happy.
Would I have offered to do her shopping, as well as mine, if
I’d been feeling unhappy? No. Would it have even occurred
to me to try to help her out? Probably not.
The Third Splendid Truth was a different kind of truth.
“The days are long, but the years are short” reminded me to
stay in the moment, to appreciate the seasons, and to revel
in this time of life—December’s yuletide atmosphere, the
girls’ little matching cherry nightgowns, the elaborate bathtime routine.
Most nights, I spent the time before bed racing around,
trying to get organized for the morning, or crashed in bed
with a book. But Jamie has a lovely habit. We call it “gazing
lovingly.” Every few weeks, he’ll say to me, “Come on, let’s
gaze lovingly,” and we go look at Eliza and Eleanor as they
sleep.
The other night he pulled me away from the computer.
“No, I’ve got too much to do,” I told him. “I need to finish a
few things before tomorrow. You go ahead.”
But he wouldn’t listen, so finally I went with him to stand in
Eleanor’s doorway. We “gazed lovingly” at her small figure
flung across the huge pile of books that she insisted on

keeping in her crib.
I said to him, “Someday we’ll look back and it will be hard
to remember that we ever had such little kids. We’ll say,
‘Remember when Eleanor still used her purple sippy cup or
when Eliza wore ruby slippers all the time?’”
He squeezed my hand. “We’ll say, ‘That was such a
happy time.’”
The days are long, but the years are short.
During the year, when people had asked me, “So what’s
the secret to happiness?,” at different times I’d answer
“Exercise” or “Sleep” or “Do good, feel good” or
“Strengthen your connections to other people.” But by the
end of December, I’d realized that the most helpful aspect
of my happiness project hadn’t been these resolutions, or
the Four Splendid Truths I’d identified, or the science I’d
learned, or all the high-minded books I’d read. The single
most effective step for me had been to keep my
Resolutions Chart.
When I’d started, I’d viewed my chart as just another fun
thing to experiment with, like the gratitude notebook. But it
had turned out to be tremendously important. Making the
resolutions wasn’t the hardest part of the happiness project
(though it was harder than I expected, in some cases, to
identify the appropriate resolution); following through was
the hardest part. The desire to change was meaningless if I
couldn’t find a way to make the change happen.
By providing an opportunity for constant review and

accountability, the Resolutions Chart kept me plugging
away. The phrases “Lighten up,” “Give proofs of love,” and
“Cut people slack” flashed through my consciousness
constantly, and I often changed my actions in consequence.
When I was annoyed when the woman working next to me
at the library kept sighing noisily, I tried to “Imitate a spiritual
master” Saint Thérèse tells the story of how she once broke
into a sweat at the effort to conquer her annoyance when a
fellow nun made maddening clicking noises during evening
prayers. Even if I didn’t do a perfect job with my resolutions,
I did do better, and the more I kept my resolutions, the
happier I was.
I’d noticed idly that a lot of people use the term “goal”
instead of “resolution,” and one day in December, it struck
me that this difference was in fact significant. You hit a
goal, you keep a resolution. “Run a marathon” makes a
good goal. It’s specific, it’s easy to measure success, and
once you’ve done it, you’ve done it. “Sing in the morning”
and “Exercise better” are better cast as resolutions. You
won’t wake up one day and find that you’ve achieved it. It’s
something that you have to resolve to do every day, forever.
Striving toward a goal provides the atmosphere of growth
so important to happiness, but it can be easy to get
discouraged if reaching the goal is more difficult than you
expected. Also, what happens once you’ve reached your
goal? Say you’ve run the marathon. What now—do you
stop exercising? Do you set a new goal? With resolutions,
the expectations are different. Each day I try to live up to my
resolutions. Sometimes I succeed, sometimes I fail, but

every day is a clean slate and a fresh opportunity. I never
expect to be done with my resolutions, so I don’t get
discouraged when they stay challenging. Which they do.
With each passing month, too, I realized the importance
of my First Commandment, “Be Gretchen.” As great minds
throughout the ages have pointed out, one of our most
pressing concerns should be to discover the laws of our
own nature. I had to build my happiness on the foundation
of my character; I had to acknowledge what really made me
happy, not what I wished made me happy. One of the
biggest surprises of the happiness project was just how
hard it was to know myself. I’d always been slightly
exasperated by philosophers’ constant emphasis on what
seemed to me to be a fairly obvious question, but in the
end I realized that I would spend my whole life grappling
with the question of how to “Be Gretchen.”
It’s funny; only once it was December and my happiness
project was drawing to a close did it occur to me to wonder
why I’d had the urge to do my happiness project in the first
place. Sure, I’d had a bus-ride epiphany about wanting to
be happier, and it had been a relief and a thrill to step out of
my ordinary life to contemplate transcendent matters—but
what had motivated me to stick with it for the whole year?
Jamie told me what he thought. “I think this happiness
project is all about you trying to get more control over your
life,” he said.
Was that true?

Perhaps. The feeling of control is an essential element of
happiness—a better predictor of happiness than, say,
income. Having a feeling of autonomy, of being able to
choose what happens in your life or how you spend your
time, is crucial. Identifying and following my resolutions had
made me feel far more in control of my time, my body, my
actions, my surroundings, and even my thoughts. Getting
control of my life was definitely an aspect of my happiness
project, and a greater feeling of control gave me a major
boost in happiness.
But something deeper was going on as well. I’d begun to
understand that, although I hadn’t quite recognized it when I
started, I was girding myself for some awesome, dreadful
challenge, or working to meet some Judgment Day
deadline for virtue. My Resolutions Chart is really my
conscience. I wonder if one day I’ll look back on this year of
my happiness project with wonder at my…innocence. “How
easy it was to be happy, then,” I might think on some dark,
distant morning. How glad I’ll be that I did everything within
my power to appreciate the life I have now, just as it is.
The year is over, and I really am happier. After all my
research, I found out what I knew all along: I could change
my life without changing my life. When I made the effort to
reach out for them, I found that the ruby slippers had been
on my feet all along; the bluebird was singing outside my
kitchen window.

AFTERWORD
Jamie joined the clinical trial for the hepatitis C drug VX950. The bad news: the treatment proved ineffective for
him. The good news: his liver continues to hold steady.
My sister’s diabetes is under control.
On the anniversary of my blog, I made a book of the
year’s blog posts on Lulu.com.
When my children’s literature reading group hit twenty
members, we had to close the group to newcomers, and I
started a second children’s literature group with more
enthusiasts.
I did two one-minute Internet movies: The Years Are
Short (www.theyearsareshort.com) and Secrets of
Adulthood (www.secretsofadulthood.com).
In addition to Jamie and my mother-in-law, I also
convinced my father-in-law and eight friends to join my
weight-training gym.
To “Show up,” “Make three new friends,” and “Be a
treasure house of happy memories,” I volunteered to be
one of two house parents for Eliza’s class at school.
I contacted several people active in the field of organ
donation and, after a long period of self-education, joined
the board of the New York Organ Donor Network.
Remember to join the organ donor registry yourself:

www.donatelife.net.
Inspired to emulate J. M. Barrie’s brilliant, strange book
The Boy Castaways of Black Lake Island (in the collection
of the Beinecke Library at Yale), which tells a story through
photographs of the Llewelyn Davies boys, a friend and I did
an elaborate project in which we wrote a skeleton story,
gathered costumes, and took photographs of our children
in Central Park. Now we’re working on publishing this
project in some form.
After successfully giving up fake food, I eventually also
gave up Tasti D-Lite, the delicious and very fake frozen
yogurt sold by the ubiquitous chain in New York.
I started getting up at 6:15 A.M. instead of 6:30 in order to
make the morning go more smoothly.
Working with the cartoonist Chari Pere, I created a short
comic, “Gretchen Rubin and the Quest for a Passion.” Drop
me a note through www.happiness-project.com if you’d like
a copy.
To help other people to do a happiness project, I created
the
Happiness
Project
Toolbox,
www.happinessprojecttoolbox.com, to pull together on one
site all the tools that I found most helpful for my happiness
project.
I also created a “starter kit” for those who would like to
form a group for people doing happiness projects. Sign up
through my blog if you would like to receive a kit.
My blog was picked up by the online magazine Slate
(www.slate.com/blogs/blogs/happinessproject).
I did indeed meet book reviewer David Greenberg at a

cocktail party, and we had a very nice converstation.
The blind date I set up in June culminated in a wedding.
I sold the proposal for a book about my happiness
project.
And now I’m off to live happily ever after.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Although one

of the most important principles I learned
during my happiness project is the importance of giving
thanks, I can’t thank everyone who helped me with my
project, because practically every person I know has given
me some insight into happiness. I couldn’t possibly list
them all by name.
Certain people, however, played particularly important
roles during the year of my happiness project. Freda
Richardson and Ashley Wilson, of course. Lori Jackson
and everyone at Inform Fitness. The members of my first
children’s literature book group: Anamaria Allessi, Julia
Bator, Ann Brashares, Sarah Burnes, Jonathan Burnham,
Dan Ehrenhaft, Amanda Foreman, Bob Hughes, Susan
Kamil, Pamela Paul, David Saylor, Elizabeth Schwarz,
Jenny Smith, Rebecca Todd, Stephanie Wilchfort, Jessica
Wollman, Amy Zilliax, and especially Jennifer Joel; and also
my second children’s literature book group: Chase Bodine,
Betsy Bradley, Sophie Gee, Betsy Gleick, Lev Grossman,
Caitlin Macy, Suzanne Myers, Jesse Scheidlower, and
especially Amy Wilensky. My working writers’ strategy
groups: Marci Alboher, Jonathan Fields, A. J. Jacobs,
Michael Melcher, and Carrie Weber. My book group for
adult literature predates the official start of my happiness
project but was an unusually helpful source of ideas and

happiness: Ann Brashares, Betsy Cohen, Cheryl Effron,
Patricia Farman-Farmaian, Sharon Greenberger, Samhita
Jayanti, Alisa Kohn, Bethany Millard, Jennifer Newstead,
Claudia Rader, Elizabeth Schwarz, Jennifer Scully, Paula
Zakaria, and particularly Julia Bator.
Thanks to the readers who commented on drafts: Delia
Boylan, Susan Devenyi, Elizabeth Craft Fierro, Reed
Hundt, A. J. Jacobs, Michael Melcher, Kim Malone Scott,
Kamy Wicoff, and most of all, Melanie Rehak.
Thanks to all the people who worked with me on various
offshoots of the Happiness Project: the far-flung Jayme
Stevens; the graphic designer Charlotte Strick; the
cartoonist Chari Pere; Tom Romer, Lauren Ribando and
the folks at the Chopping Block Web design firm; Melissa
Parrish and Tanya Singer at RealSimple.com; Verena Von
Pfetten and Anya Strzemien at The Huffington Post; and
Michael Newman at Slate.
Thanks very much to all my friends from blogland, who
have given me so much advice, help, and link love—just to
mention a few, people such as Leo Babauta, Therese
Borchard, Chris Brogan, Ben Casnocha, Tyler Cowen,
Jackie Danicki, Dory Devlin, Erin Doland, Asha Dornfest,
Kathy Hawkins, Tony Hsieh, Guy Kawasaki, Danielle
LaPorte, Brett McKay, Daniel Pink, J. D. Roth, Glen
Stansberry, Bob Sutton, Colleen Wainwright, everyone in
the LifeRemix network…I could keep going for pages. I only
hope I get to meet them all in real life one day.
I can’t say enough to thank my blog readers, particularly
those whose words I quote. Being able to exchange ideas

about happiness with so many thoughtful readers has been
extraordinarily helpful—and fun.
A huge thanks to Christy Fletcher, my agent, and to Gail
Winston, my editor—working on this book was a very
happy experience.
Most of all, thanks to my family. You are my weather.

YOUR HAPPINESS PROJECT
Each person’s happiness project will be unique, but it’s the
rare person who can’t benefit from starting one. My own
happiness project started in January and lasted a year—
and, I hope, will last for the rest of my life—but your
happiness project can start any time and last as long as
you choose. You can start small (putting your keys away in
the same place every night) or big (repairing your
relationships with your family). It’s up to you.
First, to decide what resolutions to make, consider the
First Splendid Truth and answer the following questions:
What makes you feel good? What activities do you
find fun, satisfying, or energizing?
What makes you feel bad? What are sources of
anger, irritation, boredom, frustration, or anxiety in
your life?
Is there any way in which you don’t feel right about
your life? Do you wish you could change your job, city,
family situation, or other circumstances? Are you
living up to your expectations for yourself? Does your
life reflect your values?
Do you have sources of an atmosphere of growth? In
what elements of your life do you find progress,
learning, challenge, improvement, and increased

mastery?
Answering these questions provides a good road map to
the kind of changes you might consider. Once you’ve
decided what areas need work, identify specific,
measurable resolutions that will allow you to evaluate
whether you’re making progress. Resolutions work better
when they’re concrete, not abstract: it’s harder to keep a
resolution to “Be a more loving parent” than to “Get up
fifteen minutes early so I’m dressed before the kids wake
up.”
Once you’ve made your resolutions, find a strategy to
assess your progress and to hold yourself accountable. I
copied Benjamin Franklin’s Virtues Chart to devise my
Resolutions Chart. Other approaches might be starting a
goals group, keeping a one-sentence journal marking your
progress, or starting a blog.
Another useful exercise is to identify your personal
commandments—the principles that you want to guide your
behavior. For example, my most important personal
commandment is to “Be Gretchen.”
To help you with your happiness project, I created the
Happiness
Project
Toolbox
Web
site,
www.happinessprojecttoolbox.com. There, I’ve pulled
together many of the tools that helped me with my
happiness project. You can record and score your
resolutions (individual or group), keep a one-sentence
journal on any topic you like, identify your personal
commandments, share your happiness hacks, share your

Secrets of Adulthood, keep any kind of list, and create an
inspiration board of your favorite books, quotations,
movies, music, or images. Your entries can be kept private
or made public, and you can also read other people’s
public entries (which is fascinating).
If you’d like to start a group for people doing happiness
projects, e-mail me through my blog for a starter kit. If you’d
like to join an existing group visit the Gretchen Rubin page
on Facebook to see if a group has formed in your city.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Many extraordinary books have been written about
happiness. This list doesn’t attempt to cover all the most
important works, but instead highlights some of my
personal favorites.
SOME WORKS IN THE HISTORY OF HAPPINESS

Aristotle. The Ethics of Aristotle: The Nicomachean
Ethics, ed. Hugh Tredennick, J. A. K. Thomson, and
Jonathan Barnes. New York: Penguin, 1976.
Bacon, Francis. The Essays. New York: Penguin, 1986.
Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus. The Consolation of
Philosophy. Translated by Victor Watts. New York:
Penguin, 2000.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. On the Good Life. Translated by
Michael Grant. New York: Penguin, 1971.
Dalai Lama and Howard C. Cutler. The Art of Happiness:
A Handbook for Living. New York: Riverhead, 1998.
Delacroix, Eugène. The Journal of Eugène Delacroix, 3rd
ed. Translated by Hubert Wellington. London: Phaidon
Press, 1951.
Epicurus. The Essential Epicurus. Translated by Eugene
Michael O’Connor. New York: Prometheus Books, 1993.

Hazlitt, William. Essays. London: Coward-McCann, 1950.
James, William. The Varieties of Religious Experience:
A Study in Human Nature. New York: New American
Library, 1958.
La Rochefoucauld, François de. Maxims of La
Rochefoucauld. Translated by Stuart Warner. South
Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press, 2001.
Montaigne, Michel Eyquem de. The Complete Essays of
Montaigne. Translated by Donald Frame. Palo Alto,
Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1958.
Plutarch. Selected Lives and Essays. Translated by Louise
Ropes Loomis. New York: Walter J. Black, 1951.
Russell, Bertrand. The Conquest of Happiness. New York:
Liveright, 1930.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. Parerga and Paralipomena, vols. 1
and 2. Translated by E. F. J. Payne. Oxford, England:
Clarendon Press, 1974
S eneca. Letters from a Stoic. Translated by Robin
Campbell. New York: Penguin, 1969.
Smith,
Adam. The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
Washington, D.C.: Gateway Editions, 2000.
SOME INTERESTING BOOKS ON THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE
OF HAPPINESS

Argyle, Michael. The Psychology of Happiness, 2nd ed.
New York: Taylor & Francis, 2001.
Cowen, Tyler. Discover Your Inner Economist: Use

Incentives to Fall in Love, Survive Your Next Meeting,
and Motivate Your Dentist. New York: Dutton, 2007.
Diener, Ed, and Robert Biswas-Diener. Happiness:
Unlocking the Mysteries of Psychological Wealth.
Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2008.
Easterbrook, Gregg. The Progress Paradox: How Life
Gets Better While People Feel Worse. New York:
Random House, 2003.
Eid, Michael, and Randy J. Larsen, eds. The Science of
Subjective Well-Being. New York: Guilford Press, 2008.
Frey, Bruno, and Alois Stutzer. Happiness and

Economics: How the Economy and Institutions Affect
Human Well-Being. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 2002.
Gilbert, Daniel. Stumbling on Happiness. New York:
Knopf, 2006.
Gladwell, Malcolm. Blink: The Power of Thinking Without
Thinking. New York: Little, Brown, 2005.
Haidt, Jonathan. The Happiness Hypothesis: Finding
Modern Truth in Ancient Wisdom. New York: Basic
Books, 2006.
Lyubomirsky, Sonja. The How of Happiness. New York:
Penguin Press, 2008.
Nettle, Daniel. Happiness: The Science Behind Your
Smile. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
———. Personality: What Makes You the Way You Are.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Pink, Daniel. A Whole New Mind: Why Right-Brainers Will

Rule the Future. New York: Riverhead, 2005.
Schwartz, Barry. The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is
Less. New York: HarperPerennial, 2004.
Seligman, Martin. Authentic Happiness: Using the New
Positive Psychology to Realize Your Potential for
Lasting Fulfillment. New York: Free Press, 2002.
———. Learned Optimism. New York: Knopf, 1991.
———. The Optimistic Child: How Learned Optimism
Protects Children from Depression. New York:
Houghton Mifflin, 1995.
———. What You Can Change and What You Can’t: The
Complete Guide to Successful Self-Improvement. New
York: Knopf, 1993.
Thich Nhat Hanh. The Miracle of Mindfulness. Translated
by Mobi Ho. Boston: Beacon Press, 1975.
Wilson, Timothy. Strangers to Ourselves: Discovering the
Adaptive Unconscious. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2002.
EXAMPLES OF OTHER PEOPLE’S HAPPINESS PROJECTS

Botton, Alain de. How Proust Can Change Your Life. New
York: Vintage International, 1997.
Frankl, Victor E. Man’s Search for Meaning. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1992.
Gilbert, Elizabeth. Eat, Pray, Love: One Woman’s Search
for Everything Across Italy, India and Indonesia. New

York: Penguin, 2007.
Jacobs, A. J. The Year of Living Biblically: One Man’s

Humble Quest to Follow the Bible as Literally as
Possible. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2007.
Jung, C. G. Memories, Dreams, Reflections. New York,
Vintage Books, 1963.
Krakauer, Jon. Into the Wild. New York: Villard, 1996.
Kreamer, Anne. Going Gray: What I Learned About Sex,

Work, Motherhood, Authenticity, and Everything Else
That Really Matters. New York: Little, Brown, 2007.
Lamott, Anne. Operating Instructions. New York: Random
House, 1997.
———. Traveling Mercies: Some Thoughts on Faith. New
York: Pantheon Books, 2005.
Maugham, W. Somerset. The Summing Up. New York:
Doubleday, 1938.
O’Halloran, Maura. Pure Heart, Enlightened Mind. New
York: Riverhead, 1994.
Shapiro, Susan. Lighting Up: How I Stopped Smoking,

Drinking, and Everything Else I Loved in Life Except
Sex. New York: Delacorte Press, 2004.
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden: Or, Life in the Woods.
Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2004.
A FEW HELPFUL BOOKS ABOUT RELATIONSHIPS

Demaris, Ann, and Valerie White. First Impressions: What
You Don’t KnowAbout How Others See You. New York:

Bantam Books, 2005.
Faber, Adele, and Elaine Mazlish. How to Talk So Kids
Will Listen and Listen So Kids Will Talk. New York:
Avon Books, 1980.
Fisher, Helen. Why We Love: The Nature and Chemistry
of Romantic Love. New York: Henry Holt, 2004.
Gottman, John. The Seven Principles for Making Marriage
Work. London: Orion, 2004.
Sutton, Robert I. The No Asshole Rule: Building a
Civilized Workplace and Surviving One That Isn’t. New
York: Warner Business, 2007.
SOME OF MY FAVORITE MEMOIRS OF CATASTROPHE

Beck, Martha. Expecting Adam. New York: Penguin, 2000.
Broyard, Anatole. Intoxicated by My Illness. New York:
Clarkson Potter, 1992.
Didion, Joan. The Year of Magical Thinking. New York:
Knopf, 2005.
Mack, Stan. Janet and Me: An Illustrated Story of Love
and Loss. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004.
O’Kelly, Gene. Chasing Daylight: How My Forthcoming
Death Transformed My Life. New York: McGraw-Hill,
2005.
Shulman, Alix Kates. To Love What Is. New York: Farrar,
Straus, 2008.
Weingarten, Violet. Intimations of Mortality. New York:

Knopf, 1978.
SOME OF MY FAVORITE NOVELS ABOUT HAPPINESS

Colwin,
Laurie. Happy All the Time . New York:
HarperPerennial, 1978.
Frayn, Michael. A Landing on the Sun. New York: Viking,
1991.
Grunwald, Lisa. Whatever Makes You Happy. New York:
Random House, 2005.
Hornby, Nick. How to Be Good. New York: Riverhead
Trade, 2002.
McEwan, Ian. Saturday. New York: Doubleday, 2005.
Patchett, Ann. Bel Canto. New York: HarperCollins, 2001.
Robinson, Marilynne. Gilead. New York: Farrar, Straus,
2004.
Stegner, Wallace. Crossing to Safety. New York: Random
House, 1987.
Tolstoy, Leo. Anna Karenina. Translated by A. Maude.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1939.
———. “The Death of Ivan Ilyich,” in The Death of Ivan
Ilyich and Other Stories. Translated by T. C. B. Cook.
London: Wordsworth Editions, 2004.
———. Resurrection. New York: Oxford World Classics,
1994.
— — — . War and Peace. Translated by Rosemary
Edmonds. New York: Penguin, 1957.
Von Arnim, Elizabeth. Elizabeth and Her German Garden.

Chicago: W. B. Conkey Co., 1901.
THE BOOKS THAT MOST INFLUENCED MY OWN HAPPINESS
PROJECT

Benjamin. The Autobiography of Benjamin
Franklin. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,

Franklin,

1964.
Thérèse of Lisieux. Story of a Soul, 3rd ed. John Clarke,
O.C.D. Washington, D.C.: ICS Publications, 1996.
Everything written by Samuel Johnson.

About the Author
GRETCHEN RUBIN is the author of several books,
including the bestselling Forty Ways to Look at Winston
Churchill and Forty Ways to Look at JFK. Rubin began her
career in law, and she was clerking for Supreme Court
Justice Sandra Day O’Connor when she realized that she
really wanted to be a writer. Raised in Kansas City, she
lives in New York City with her husband and two young
daughters.

Visit Gretchen Rubin’s popular blog, The Happiness
Project, at Slate.com or at www.happinessproject.com.
Her
author
Web
site
is
www.gretchenrubin.com.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on
your favorite HarperCollins author.

ALSO BY GRETCHEN RUBIN

Forty Ways to Look at JFK
Forty Ways to Look at Winston Churchill
Power Money Fame Sex: A User’s Guide
Profane Waste (with Dana Hoey)

Credits
Jacket photograph © Russell Kord/Alamy; bluebird
illustration by Juliette Borda
Jacket design by Archie Ferguson and Christine Van Bree

Copyright
The names and identifying details of certain individuals
have been changed to protect their privacy.
THE HAPPINESS PROJECT. Copyright © 2009 by Gretchen

Rubin. All rights reserved under International and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive,
non-transferable right to access and read the text of this ebook on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted,
down-loaded,
decompiled,
reverse
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information
storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means,
whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rubin, Gretchen Craft.
The happiness project/by Gretchen Rubin.—1st ed.
p. cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-06-158325-4
ISBN-10: 0-06-158325-1
1. Happiness. 2. Self-actualization (Psychology) I. Title.

BF575.H27R83 2009
158—dc22 2009001412
EPub Edition © November 2009 ISBN: 978-0-06-1962066
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

Table of Contents
Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Epigraph
Contents
A Note to the Reader
Getting Started
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Afterword
Acknowledgments
Your Happiness Project
Suggestions for Further Reading
About the Author
Other Books by Gretchen Rubin

Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher



